The

BEGINNER’S
Guide to

REAL ESTATE
INVESTING
G A RY W. E L D R E D , P h . D .

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

The

BEGINNER’S
Guide to

REAL ESTATE
INVESTING

The

BEGINNER’S
Guide to

REAL ESTATE
INVESTING
G A RY W. E L D R E D , P h . D .

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2004 by Gary W. Eldred. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty:While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation.You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United
States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit
our web site at www.Wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Eldred, Gary W.
The beginner’s guide to real estate investing / Gary W. Eldred.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 0–471–64711–X (paper)
1. Real estate investment. I.Title.
HD1375.E353 2004
332.63 24—dc22
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

2004040730

C

O N T E N T S

Why This Book?

xi

PART ONE: MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH
1. Get Started Now

1

3

Just Say No to Excuses 3
You Must Believe It to See It
Set Goals Now 12

7

2. Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

19

Appreciation in Market Values 19
Inﬂation 21
Cash Flows 23
Mortgage Payoff (Amortization) 24
Buy Below Market Value 25
Create Value with Property Improvements 25
Improve the Neighbors and Neighborhood
26
Convert the Use 27
Manage and Market Your Properties More Proﬁtably 29
Protect Your Proﬁts from the IRS (Tax Shelter) 29
Discounted Notes,Tax Liens,Tax Deeds, and Realty Stocks
PART TWO: HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY
3. Strengthen Your Credit Power

32

35

37

Consistency: Fast Track or Flake
Character Counts 38
Credit Scores Count Most 40
Summing Up 49

37

4. How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

50

v

vi

CONTENTS

Why Low-Cash Deals Magnify Your Returns 50
Minimize Your Down Payment with Owner-Occupant
Financing 54
Don’t Overlook FHA 57
Discover FHA’s Best Kept Secret: The 203(k) Program 59
Too Many Vets Pass Up VA Loans 62
Even Fannie and Freddie Accept Little- or Nothing-Down
Loans 63
Summing Up 64
5. Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

66

Sellers Can Nearly Always Beat the Banks at Their Own Game,
But You Must Do More than Ask 67
Mortgage (Trust Deed) 70
Try a Contract-for-Deed 73
Assume a Low-Interest-Rate Mortgage 76
“Assume” a Nonassumable Mortgage 79
6. Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

83

Wraparounds Beneﬁt Buyers and Sellers 83
Lease Options 84
The Lease-Option Sandwich 90
Lease-Purchase Agreements 91
Master-Lease an Apartment Building 93
7. How to Come Up with the Money to Close

96

Cash Out Some of Your Current Home’s Equity 96
Bring in Partners 97
Second Mortgages 99
Personal Savings 100
Sell Unnecessary Assets 100
Down-Payment Assistance 101
Easy Money—Hard Terms 101
Use Credit Cards 105
Personal Loans 106
Sweat Equity (Creating Value through Renovations) 106
Eliminate Your Down Payment with Pledged Collateral 106

Contents

Student Loans 108
Use More Creative Finance
8. Here’s How to Qualify

vii

108

110

Be Wary of Prequalifying (and Preapproval) 110
You Can Make Your Qualifying Ratios Look Better 112
The Application Itself Contains Many Clues to Your
Integrity 122
No Rigid Borrowing Limits Apply to Commercial
Properties 123
PART THREE: HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

127

9. Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

129

Why Properties Sell for Less (or More) than Their
Market Value 129
Don’t Dilly-Dally with Due Diligence 135
How to Find Bargain Sellers 137
10. Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

143

The Stages of Foreclosure 143
Approach Owners with Empathy: Step One 145
Some Investors Do Proﬁt from the Foreclosure Auction: Step
Two 148
The Beneﬁts of Buying REOs: Step Three 151
11. More Sources of Bargains

156

Federal Government Auctions 156
Sheriff Sales 157
Buy from Foreclosure Speculators 157
Probate and Estate Sales 157
Private Auctions 159
Short Sale Bargains 162
12. Run Numbers Like a Pro

170

Follow the Construction Cycle

171

viii

CONTENTS

How to Proﬁt from the Construction Cycle 171
Per-Unit Measures 174
Gross Rent Multipliers (GRMs) 176
Capitalized Value 177
Cash Flow Returns 182
Don’t Settle for Market Rates of Appreciation: Create Value

184

13. How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your
Investment Property 185
Search for Competitive Advantage 186
First, Verify Actual Rent Collections, Not Merely Rental Rates
Talk with Tenants 188
Set Your Rents with Market Savvy 189
Your Apartment Checklist 190
Give the Interior a Martha Stewart Makeover 192
Safety, Security, and Convenience 194
Rightsize the Rooms 195
Create More Storage 196
Check Noise Levels 198
Overall Livability 199
14. Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of
Your Properties 200
Create Strikingly Attractive Curb Appeal 200
Collect More than Rent 203
Convert a Garage, Attic, or Basement 204
Create an Accessory Apartment 206
Create a Special Purpose Use 206
Change the Use of a Property 207
Cut Operating Expenses 209
Gentriﬁcation and Other Value Plays 211
PART FOUR: ONWARD AND UPWARD TO
BUILDING WEALTH 219
15. Win What You Want through Negotiation
How to Deﬁne Win-Win

221

221

187

Contents

ix

Know Thyself 224
Know the Property and Neighborhood 224
Know the Sellers 225
Establish Favorable Benchmarks 227
Tit for Tat 228
Get Seller Concessions Early 228
Come Ready to Buy 228
Ask for More than You Expect 229
Establish Credibility 230
Never Offer to Split the Difference 231
List Your BATNAs 232
Negotiate for Yourself 233
Leave Something on the Table 235
16. How to Write Your Purchase Offer

236

No Single Contract Form 236
Make Sure You Draft These Clauses with Care and
Understanding 237
Summing Up 247
17. Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

248

Achieve Competitive Advantage 248
Craft Your Rental Agreement 249
Landlording: Pros and Cons 261
18. The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

263

The Good News 263
Hired Management versus Self-Management 265
Before You Buy, Verify, Verify, Verify 269
Prepare the Property for Rental 270
Craft a Winning Value Proposition 271
Attract Topﬂight Tenants 273
Create a Flawless Move-In 276
Retain Topﬂight Residents 277
When the Market Supports It, Raise Rents 279
Anticipate and Prepare for Special Problems 280
Maintain the Property 282

CONTENTS

x

Process Move-Outs Smoothly 282
Persistently Find Ways to Increase Your Cash Flow
Keep Trading Up 284
Internet Appendix
Index

293

287

283

W H Y

T H I S

B O O K ?

Why this book? In writing The Beginner’s Guide to Real Estate Investing, my intent has been to cover all topics that ﬁrst-time real estate investors need to know—but to do so in less depth than I’ve included in
my previous Wiley titles.
Here you’ll ﬁnd discussions about credit scoring, mortgages, seller
ﬁnancing, negotiation, foreclosures, bargain-hunting, appraisal, valuation,
creating value, cash ﬂow analysis, property management, and dozens of
other topics. In this book, you’ll gain a proﬁt-generating introduction to
the complete range of knowledge you’ll need to begin building wealth
in real estate.
In other words, another title for this book might have been Real Estate Investing in a Nutshell.This book is directed toward those readers
who want to sample all investment topics in one easy-to-read volume.
In contrast, for those readers and experienced investors who prefer
more depth on each of the topics discussed herein, I might suggest that,
you instead select from some combination of these titles: Investing in
Real Estate, 4th ed. (with Andrew McLean), Make Money with FixerUppers and Renovations, Make Money with Small Income Properties,
Make Money with Condominiums and Townhouses, The 106 Mortgage Secrets All Borrowers Must Know—but Lenders Don’t Tell, The
106 Common Mistakes Homebuyers Make—and How to Avoid Them,
3rd ed., and The Complete Guide to Second Homes for Vacations, Retirement, and Investment.

xi

xii

WHY THIS BOOK?

Either way, whether you select this abridged volume or some combination of my other titles, you’ll ﬁnd that I always offer my readers the
most detailed and practical guides to investing in real estate that are
available. Although I am quite optimistic on your opportunities to build
wealth with property, I never mislead my readers into believing that this
wealth will come without knowledge, time, and effort.
It’s certainly true.You can still get rich in real estate. But you must
learn how to analyze properties, neighborhoods, and ﬁnancial risks and
rewards. And that’s exactly what my books will help you learn.
I wish you good luck and good fortune.
Gary W. Eldred

The

BEGINNER’S
Guide to

REAL ESTATE
INVESTING

P A R T

ONE

Mindset + Knowledge
= Wealth

C H A P T E R

1

Get Started Now

In this book, I want to motivate and educate you. I want to get you
started in real estate. I hope to persuade you that real estate investing
can still lead you to a lifetime of wealth and personal fulﬁllment. No matter what ﬁnancial goals you
set for yourself, no matter how little cash, credit, or
You can still get
income you currently possess, if you choose to, you
rich in real estate.
can still build your fortune in real estate.

Just Say No to Excuses
“But wait a minute,” you say. “You can’t be talking to me. In my area of
the country, property prices have climbed sky-high. Besides, I really
don’t have enough cash, credit, or time to get started. And even if I did,
real estate seems too complex. I can’t even balance my checkbook.”
As I travel throughout the country and talk with would-be beginning investors, I repeatedly hear these types of excuses. But it may surprise you to learn that I’ve heard these same excuses for nearly 30 years.

Naysayers Thrive in All Times and Places
When times are good, people fret over the deals they’ve missed. When
times are bad, these same folks claim that real estate is no longer a good
3

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

4

investment. Either way, they always ﬁnd some way to color the future
bleak (see Box 1.1).
Yet, since the early 1970s I have seen all types of booms and busts.
I have seen 18 percent mortgage interest rates. I’ve lived through the
multiple turmoils of double-digit rates of inﬂation, the disastrous 1986
Tax Reform Act (which killed off the most proﬁtable
real estate tax shelter techniques), and the recent
You can make
market of sky-high prices. Yet I (and nearly all other
money in any type
savvy investors) have ﬁgured out how to make
money in every one of these market situations and
of market.
all of the other types of markets in between.

Among all the lessons history teaches, none is more certain than the
fact that home prices will go up. Regardless of how high you think
prices are today, they will be higher 10 years from now and much,
much higher 20 or 30 years into the future. Don’t make the mistake
of believing that “home prices have reached their peak.” Before you
accept the naysaying of so-called economic experts, take a quick
trip through some of their faulty predictions from years gone by:
◆ The prices of houses seem to have reached a plateau, and there is

reasonable expectancy that prices will decline. (Time, December
1, 1947)
◆ Houses cost too much for the mass market. Today’s average price
is around $8,000—out of reach for two-thirds of all buyers. (Science Digest, April 1948)
◆ If you have bought your house since the War . . . you have made
your deal at the top of the market. . . . The days when you couldn’t
lose on a house purchase are no longer with us. (House Beautiful,
November 1948)
◆ The goal of owning a home seems to be getting beyond the reach
of more and more Americans. The typical new house today costs
about $28,000. (Business Week, September 4, 1969)
(continued)
Box 1.1
Regrets

Those Folks Who Listen to the Naysayers End Up with a Pile of

Get Started Now

(Continued)
◆ Be suspicious of the “common wisdom” that tells you to “Buy

now . . . because continuing inﬂation will force home prices and
rents higher and higher.” (NEA Journal, December 1970)
◆ The median price of a home today is approaching $50,000. . . .
Housing experts predict that in the future price rises won’t be that
great. (Nation’s Business, June 1977)
◆ The era of easy proﬁts in real estate may be drawing to a close.
(Money, January 1981)
◆ In California . . . for example, it is not unusual to ﬁnd families of average means buying $100,000 houses. . . . I’m conﬁdent prices
have passed their peak. (J. E. English and G. E. Cardiff, The Coming
Real Estate Crash, Warner Books, 1980)
◆ The golden age of risk-free run-ups in home prices is gone.
(Money, March 1985)
◆ If you’re looking to buy, be careful. Rising home values are not a
sure thing anymore. (Miami Herald, October 25, 1985)
◆ Most economists agree . . . [a home] will become little more than
a roof and a tax deduction, certainly not the lucrative investment it
was through much of the 1980s. (Money, April 1986)
◆ We’re starting to go back to the time when you bought a home not
for its potential moneymaking abilities, but rather as a nesting
spot. (Los Angeles Times, January 31, 1993)
◆ Financial planners agree that houses will continue to be a poor investment. (Kiplinger’s Personal Financial Magazine, November
1993)
◆ A home is where the bad investment is. (San Francisco Examiner,
November 17, 1996)
◆ Your house is a roof over your head. It is not an investment.
(Karen Ramsey, Everything You Know About Money Is Wrong,
Reagan Books, 1999)
◆ The trends that have produced the housing boom . . . have nearly
run their course. This virtually guarantees . . . plummeting home
prices and mass foreclosures. . . . (John Rubino, How to Proﬁt
from the Coming Real Estate Bust, Rodale, 2003)
Box 1.1

(Continued)

5

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

6

Build Wealth in Any Market
You’ve heard it said before,“The only constant is change.”And when markets change, that change creates opportunities. Here are just a few examples:
◆ When prices appreciate fast, you can “ﬁx and ﬂip” for quick proﬁts.
◆ Appreciating prices also give you the tax-free beneﬁt of cash-out reﬁ-

nances.
◆ Falling interest rates (even with stable prices) reward you with a reﬁ-

nance that lowers your monthly payments and increases your cash
ﬂows.
◆ Depressed markets provide you with an abundance of foreclosures,
motivated sellers, and bargain-priced properties.
◆ High rates of inﬂation drive up market interest rates and cut down
short-term demand. That’s the perfect time to look for seller ﬁnancing,
lease options, and low-interest-rate mortgages that you can take over
(assume) from the sellers.
◆ High rates of inﬂation also reduce the number of newly constructed
houses because builders must pay higher construction costs and
higher interest rates. Fewer housing starts clearly signals an excellent
time to buy. A slowdown in new housing always foreshadows a jump in
prices as growing demand outpaces new supply. (California perfectly
illustrates this point—albeit low housing starts in California are now
being caused by tight land-use controls, environmental protection, and
restrictive growth management policies.)

These moneymaking examples merely touch upon the multitude of
strategies you will discover throughout this book, but they illustrate one
central message that I have advocated throughout my career and in all of
my writings:
Q. When’s the best time for you to invest in real estate?
A. Today.
But don’t jump to the wrong conclusion. By saying “invest today,” I
don’t mean that you can never go wrong. Rather, I mean that there’s
never a wrong time to invest if you choose the right strategy. And that’s
what I’m going to show you.

Get Started Now

7

You Must Believe It to See It
Given the large rewards that most savvy real estate investors have
achieved over the years, I’ve often wondered why most people fail to invest in real estate. After much thought and talks
with hundreds of would-be investors, I’ve come to
The time to start
this conclusion: Most people simply don’t believe in
the future and they don’t believe in themselves.
really is now.
As a result, most people don’t believe in their
ability to actually make big money in real estate.
These negative thinkers erect a wall of excuses that blocks their vision.
This wall prevents them from seeing the proﬁt potential that lies in front
of them. So, will you join the ranks of the naysayers? Or will you open
your mind to a promising future?

Imagine the Future
Think about your future. Imagine you’re reading the real estate classiﬁed
ads 10 years from today. What do these ads of tomorrow say?
Are property prices higher or lower than they are today? Are rent
levels higher or lower than they are today? If you believe in the continuing growth of the United States, you must believe that just as with every
past decade, today’s property prices and rent levels will look cheap relative to where they will stand 10 years from now (see Table 1.1).

Reprogram Your Self-Talk
Ask yourself whether you really want to beneﬁt from those future gains.
Or would you prefer to merely watch others reap these near-certain
Table 1.1
Year
1970
1975
1980
1985

Historical Growth in Median Home Prices
Price
$23,000
35,300
62,200
75,500

Year
1990
1995
2000
2005

Statistical Abstract of the United States 2003, p. 723

Price
$ 95,500
113,100
138,400
182,000 (est.)

8

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

proﬁts? If you do want to succeed—yet you feel blocked by excuses—
then reprogram your self-talk.
What Is Self-Talk? In his mind-opening book, What To Say When You
Talk to Yourself (Pocket Books, 1986, p. 25), Shad Helmstetter writes,
You will become what you think about most. Your success or
failure in anything, large or small, will depend on your mental
programming—what you accept from others, and what you
say when you talk to yourself.
After years of study, this nationally renowned psychologist has
found that as a matter of habit, most of us swamp our optimism and
hence our motivation to change for the better with negative self-talk.
Think about your own thoughts. Do you accept the
negative as “true” or “the way things really are”? Do
you frequently focus on risks rather than opportuniYou must believe
ties? Ponder these familiar excuses that you’ve eiit to see it.
ther said to yourself or heard others say hundreds of
times:
◆ I can’t remember names.
◆ It’s just no use.
◆ No matter what I do, I just can’t keep the weight off.
◆ I never have enough time.
◆ I’m just too disorganized.
◆ I’m no good at math.
◆ I’m always running late.

Now think about this: If you program yourself with these types of
negative self-descriptions, will you undertake any serious efforts to
change these or other undesirable traits and habits? Of course not! And
the same thing stands true for those beliefs (self-talk) that can block you
from getting started in real estate. Once again, think about the types of
excuses that I frequently hear:
◆ Prices are too high.
◆ I can’t afford to buy.
◆ I missed so many good opportunities.
◆ I can’t get ﬁnancing because of my credit problems.

Get Started Now

9

◆ It’s too late to get started now. I should have invested years ago.
◆ Real estate will take up too much time.
◆ I don’t want to deal with tenants, stopped-up toilets, leaky roofs,

or broken furnaces.
◆ I don’t know enough to get started—or even how to get started.
◆ We don’t have any extra cash. We’re spending more than we

make.

Use self-talk to
discover and
develop your real
potential.

You may or may not identify with any of these
speciﬁc excuses. But unless you discipline your selftalk far better than most people, you undoubtedly
have at least a few areas where your false beliefs
keep you from taking positive action.
As to real estate investing, I urge you to reprogram your negative self-talk and limiting beliefs with
mind-opening questions such as these:

◆ What are six ways I can save more and spend less?
◆ Where are the best neighborhoods to ﬁnd bargain-priced prop-

erties?
◆ How might I persuade the sellers to accept owner ﬁnancing?
◆ Who do I know with money that I could partner with?
◆ How can I boost my credit score?
◆ How can I improve this property to enhance its value by the

largest amount?
Ideally (at least concerning real estate investing), you must erase
your negative self-talk tapes. Then rerecord positive self-talk. Instead of
bringing yourself down with talk or beliefs that create undesirable
habits, attitudes, and outcomes, focus on the behavior and belief patterns
that will lead you where you want to go. Ask yourself questions that lead
to opportunities and problem-solving.

Why Questions? To solve any problem, ﬁrst ask a question. Questions and the habit of asking them lead you to discover possibilities. People (usually underachievers) who merely settle for preprogrammed
conclusions won’t ask questions. Because they believe they already
know the answers, they unwittingly overlook the choices and the possibilities the world is offering them. You must always realize that if you
don’t like the program you’re living, you’re free to switch the channel.

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

10

Questions help
you achieve your
goals.

Lifelong Job? The Wall Street Journal (September 23, 2003, p. D2) published a recent survey by
AARP (formerly known as the American Association
of Retired Persons). The Journal reporter writes,

According to a new study, many American workers are planning to push their retirement age well into their 70s,
or in some cases, their 80s . . . largely because of deep cracks in
their nest eggs. . . . These ﬁndings quantify a signiﬁcant shift in
thinking that is resulting largely because of the stock market
downturn and historically low interest rates on the more conservative investments. . . . The need for money was named as
the primary motivation by workers who plan to stay on the
job . . .
When I read the results of surveys such as this, two thoughts come to
mind:
1. Why didn’t more of these now-disappointed workers invest
more money in real estate instead of stocks?
2. And more important, why don’t they at least get started now?
Starting late most assuredly beats never starting at all.
To know that most of these folks are now rushing into low-yielding
certiﬁcates of deposit, annuities, and government bonds once again reinforces my message here. They’re choosing low yields because they hold
false beliefs about real estate investing. No rational
person could possibly choose lifelong employment
and meager returns on so-called safe investments
No one needs to
such as annuities, bonds, and CDs if they really beaccept low yields.
lieved (and understood) the possibilities that
presently exist in real estate.
Two More False Beliefs In his popular book The Four Pillars of Investing (McGraw-Hill, 2003), William Bernstein repeats two more widely held
myths of modern investing. You’ve heard them before. But they’re false.
1.

“No guts, no glory.” Bernstein claims that if you want to increase your potential rewards from investing, you must learn
to accept more risk. Bernstein writes,“Whether you invest in

Get Started Now

11

stocks, bonds, or for that matter real estate, you are rewarded
mainly for your exposure to one thing—risk.”
2. “The market is smarter than you are.” Here, Bernstein
merely repeats the “efﬁcient market” theory of modern ﬁnance. In an efﬁcient market, all asset prices supposedly reﬂect their true market value. According to Bernstein, you can
never ﬁnd bargain-priced investments.
As they pertain to real estate, both of Bernstein’s so-called pillars of
investing are perfectly silly. When you invest in real estate, you gain these
two proﬁt-generating beneﬁts:
1. In real estate, you are not merely being rewarded for
taking risk. You are rewarded for applying your intelligence
and market savvy. You are rewarded for providing a target market (tenants or buyers) a property that offers better value than
competing properties.
2. You can beat the market. When you put into action the
steps and techniques described in this book, you will discover
and create opportunities that the majority of property owners
(along with those naysayers who shout from the sidelines)
consistently miss.
Nevertheless, these widespread false beliefs can actually work to
boost your investment returns. Because ﬁnancial planners and economists (who typically have no meaningful experience with real estate investing) give such faulty advice, their advice keeps investor competition
for properties far below the level that would otherwise exist.
In other words, as long as most potential inThe false beliefs of
vestors
believe that to earn big returns in real estate
others boost your
they must take big risks, they will continue to stand
opportunities.
on the sidelines. They will leave more opportunities
for you.

Summing Up Self-Talk and False Beliefs No doubt, today’s real estate market will challenge you. But if you keep your eyes on the prize
and your mind ﬁlled with possibilities, you will discover multiple ways
to build real estate wealth (see Chapter 2). As the dynamic speaker, Les

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

12

It’s possible, and

Brown, says in his motivation video, It’s Possible, the
road may not be easy, but it’s worth it!

it’s worth it!

Set Goals Now
What’s a realistic dream? It’s a goal with a deadline. To get started now,
act now to reset your priorities.
Most of us squander our time and our money pursuing transient
pleasures. A new car, a trip to Europe, $10 lunches, TV football weekends—we waste our precious talents and resources. As a result, we suffer long-lasting regrets. But if you do today what others won’t do,
tomorrow you’ll be able to live in the enviable style that most people
will never be able to experience.
Set goals now. Precisely what goals depend on where you are today
and what you wish to achieve.
As a starting point, nearly all successful investors agree that if you
truly want to build wealth, you will set these stringent goals:
1. Dramatically cut your spending and increase your cash savings.
2. Shape up your credit proﬁle.
3. Closely read the real estate classiﬁeds in your local paper.
4. Diligently telephone sellers and go out and look at properties.
5. Join a real estate investment club.
6. Read at least ﬁve more books on real estate within the next
three months. Also read at least three books by “personal
coaches” such as Tony Robbins, Wayne Dyer, Les Brown, Shad
Helmstetter, and Maxwell Maltz.
7. Commit to making your ﬁrst real estate investment within the
next three months.

Spend Less, Save More
When Jack Holden was asked how his family got started investing in real
estate, here’s how he responded. “We scraped, borrowed, and leveraged
from every resource we had to muster the funds we needed. . . . For
seed money we cashed in saving bonds and borrowed from our insur-

Get Started Now

13

ance policies. . . . The entire family went on an austerity plan to cut back
our food, travel, and entertainment expenses. Today we’re thankful we
made those early sacriﬁces.”Thankful, yes, and also wealthy. Because of
their disciplined spending, saving, and investing, the Holdens (an otherwise average family) built a real estate net worth of $4.7 million that includes not only their home equity of $600,000, but also a variety of
rental houses and small apartment buildings.
Like most people who make big money in property, the Holdens
didn’t start out with cash. As Jack Holden says, his family scrimped,
saved, leveraged, and borrowed every way they could.
So what’s the lesson that you can learn? To build
wealth in real estate, don’t wait until you get the cash
or credit and then decide to invest. No! First, commit
Commit to
yourself to investing, then ﬁgure out how to come up
building wealth
with the money. You can keep “wishing and a-hopbefore you get the
ing” to invest someday. Or you can now decide to
own property and immediately begin to shape up
money to invest.
your ﬁnances and create a plan to invest.
Want some ideas to start your own austerity
plan, raise cash, and strengthen your credit? Try
these suggestions.
Set today’s
Never Say Budget No one likes to budget. It
priorities
sounds too much like work. Instead, think priorities.
according to what
Think reward. The quality of your life improves as
you want to
you allocate your money according to your highest
values. If you truly want to own investment real esachieve within ﬁve
tate, put your money where it can yield the smartest
years.
returns. For example . . .
Stop Paying Rent If you don’t yet own your own home, rent is probably your biggest money waster. Can you ﬁgure out how to eliminate or
reduce your rent payments? Can you switch to a lower-cost apartment?
Can you house-share? Can you ﬁnd a house-sitting job for the next 3 to
12 months? Can you move back with your parents or stay rent-free with
relatives or friends? Bank your rent money for 6 to 12 months, and for
the rest of your life you need never pay rent again.
Cut Your Food Bills in Half Eliminate eating out. Brown-bag your
lunches. Buy unbranded foods in bulk. Prepare your food in large

14

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

quantities and freeze portions in meal-sized servings. Forget those $2 to
$3 microwave lunches and dinners. Locate a remainder and closeout
grocery like Save-a-Lot, Big Lots, or Drug Emporium. Or maybe you can
shop the food warehouses that have opened in most cities. Food prices
in discount stores sometimes run 20 to 50 percent less than big-name supermarkets. Collect and use as many coupons as you can ﬁnd. When you
ﬁnd bargain-priced items you regularly use, buy them by the case.
Cut Your Credit Cards in Half Credit card spending is just too easy. Put
yourself on a strict diet of cash. Nothing holds back spending more than
having to count out real cash. Besides, credit card bills will zap strength
from your borrowing power. Even worse, by the time you’ve ﬁnished paying off your credit card balances at 18 percent interest, you will pay back $2 for every dollar you originally
Credit card
charged—and that’s in after-tax, take-home dollars.
Once you consider that you only take home 60 to 80
spending kills
percent of what you earn, you’ll see that you may have
wealth building.
to earn $3 to pay back each dollar you charge to your
credit cards.
Don’t Put the Car Before the Investment Property If you own a
car that’s worth nearly as much as a down payment on an investment
property, sell that car. Get rid of those big cash-draining car payments. If
your car is mostly paid for, there’s a good part of the money you need to
move up to investment property. If you’re thinking about buying a more
expensive car, stop! Until you can afford to pay cash for a new car, drive
the least expensive, dependable pre-owned car you can ﬁnd. For too
many Americans, their car is the enemy of their investment program.
Buy Your Clothes in Thrift Shops In her newspaper column, Dress
for Less, Candy Barrie writes, “I’m a big fan of these [consignment and
thrift] shops for the fashion bargains you can ﬁnd there. . . . Get on down
and you’ll discover we’re not just talking about 20, 30, or 40 percent discounts. Sometimes you can get your clothes for 90 to 95 percent off retail.”
You can save thousands on clothing expenses. Just follow Candy’s
advice: Check all the recycled, discount, and closeout clothing stores in
your area (or a nearby big city). Whatever your tastes and price range,
you’ll ﬁnd that you can slash your total clothing costs by 50 percent or
more. I regularly shop at a small, local store where the owner provides

Get Started Now

15

excellent service and advice along with well-known name brands such
as L.L. Bean, Eddie Bauer, and Lands’ End, at prices 40 to 70 percent off
retail.
Don’t Buy New Furniture or Appliances As with their cars and
clothing, most would-be investors spend too much, too soon for furniture and appliances. Even worse, instead of paying cash, they charge it.
They chain themselves to several years of payments at high interest
rates. Increasingly, they are hooked into those “no payments, no interest
for six months” types of promotions that make credit purchases almost
too easy to pass up. Do yourself a favor: resist this temptation to spend
and borrow.
Whenever you buy cars, furniture, or appliances, let someone else
suffer the depreciation. Pay for the usefulness of the product. The less
money you waste on depreciating assets, the quicker you can start building wealth through real estate investments.

Shape Up Your Credit Proﬁle
Go to www.myﬁco.com and print copies of your credit reports and
credit scores. Examine your reports for errors. If you ﬁnd errors, start
the paperwork now. Correcting credit errors can require weeks—and
sometimes months.
If your debt load is too high or your payment record too slow, commit now to positive change. Reduce your balances. Pay all accounts before their due date. Fortunately, when the myﬁco computer program
calculates your credit score, the credit scorers will give your recent and
righteous credit experience more weight than your past undisciplined
credit habits. (You’ll ﬁnd many more tips on credit scoring in Chapter 3.)

Closely Read the Real Estate Classiﬁeds
When you read the real estate classiﬁeds closely, you’ll get a good feel for
the relative prices and rent levels that prevail among and within the various neighborhoods and communities in your area. In addition, you’ll spot
easy buying techniques such as lease option, owner ﬁnance, and contractfor-deed. Notice how frequently these techniques show up in the ads.

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

16

Telephone Sellers (Agents) and Look at Properties
At this preliminary stage, you’re not necessarily looking to buy—you’re
looking to learn the market. Randomly view properties. Note desirable
and undesirable features. Drive through and explore neighborhoods and
communities that are new to you. Discover how much “for sale” and “for
rent” inventory is sitting on the market. Watch trends in property selling
prices, apartment vacancy rates, and rent concessions.

Join a Real Estate Investment Club
Nearly every community offers beginning investors the opportunity to
join a locally operated apartment owners’ association or real estate investment club. In addition, in most midsized and large cities, real estate
and lending pros often offer free (or low-cost) seminars on investing and
ﬁnancing.
Attend these investment group meetings. Talk with others who
have learned the secrets of investing from years of experience. Review
and ponder the lessons they’ve learned and the trends they’re noticing.
Then, always verify what you hear with facts. Some realty pros observe
carefully and possess sharp insights. Others merely love to bluster with
ill-formed opinions—especially to an eager listener. Perfect your ability
to distinguish the sage from the braggart.

Read More
The bookshelves in my ofﬁces are loaded from top to bottom with hundreds of books on real estate. Yet I still buy and read nearly every new
book in the ﬁeld. Likewise your search for knowledge, your search to
improve your investing techniques and proﬁtability, should never cease.
Knowledge not only guides you toward building wealth, it conquers
fear.
Read Local Papers Besides reading books on real estate, read the real
estate and community sections of your local newspapers and business
journals. From these articles you’ll learn about emerging neighborhoods, new property developments, zoning and regulatory issues, price

Get Started Now

17

and vacancy trends, business growth, and foreclosure ﬁlings. Savvy investors stay on top of local property-related events and adapt their investment strategy to proﬁt from ever-present change.
Read in the Field of Self-Improvement To follow a path of constant improvement, regularly read books in the self-help/motivational
ﬁeld. I like the work of Tony Robbins,Wayne Dyer, Les Brown, and Shad
Helmstetter. But within the broad ﬁeld of self-help I include books on
health, ﬁtness, time management, and dealing with people. If you prefer,
listen to books. You can ﬁnd nearly all self-enhancement topics on cassette tapes and compact disks. Rather than waste time when you’re driving, put those hours to productive use.
And don’t forget, browse the collection of books, CDs, and tapes at
your public library. To change your life—ﬁnancially and personally—persistently use books and tapes to improve your habits, your thinking, your
self-talk, and your performance. Your greatest power remains the power
to choose the life you want.

Commit to Invest within Three Months
How many times have you heard people lament? “You know, we’ve been
thinking about getting started in real estate investing for years. But I
don’t know. We just never seemed to get around to it. Gosh, would we
be set now if we had only done what we were thinking.”
Over the years, I’ve heard laments like this thousands of times. For
some reason, people love to lament and regret—yet they still fail to act.
Please, when you ﬁnd yourself regretting or procrastinating, escape from
these traps. Act now! (See Box 1.2.)
Action cures regret. Action prevents future regret. Action creates
the wealth you want. Regret mires you in a past that cannot change. Set
your most important goals now. Commit to making
your ﬁrst real estate investment within the next 90
days. Mark it on your calendar. You will ﬁnd that
Action cures fear
once you get started, your progress will accelerate.
and regret.
Not only will experience teach you better than
books, but experience will help make your reading
pay much larger dividends.
Now, let’s get started. You are going to learn how to proﬁt from real
estate in multiple ways.

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

18

Someday I should write a list
Of all the deals that I have missed;
Bonanzas that were in my grip—
I watched them through my ﬁngers slip;
The windfalls which I should have
bought
Were lost because I overthought
I thought of this, I thought of that,
I could have sworn I smelled a rat,
And while I thought things over twice,
Another grabbed them at the price.
It seems I always hesitate,
Then make up my mind much too late.
A very cautious man am I
And that is why I wait to buy.
When tracks rose high on Sixth
and Third,
The price asked was, I felt absurd;
Those apartment blocks—black
with soot—
Were priced a thirty bucks a-foot!
I wouldn’t even make a bid,
But others did—yes, others did!
When Tucson was cheap desert land,
I could have had a heap of sand;
When Phoenix was the place to buy,
I thought the climate was too dry;
“Invest in Dallas—that’s the spot!”
My sixth sense warned me I should not.
A very prudent man am I
And that is why I wait to buy.

How Nassau and how Suffolk grew!
North Jersey! Staten Island, too!
When others culled those
sprawling farms
And welcomed deals with open arms . . .
A corner here, ten acres there,
Compounding values year by year,
I chose to think and as I thought,
They bought the deals I should have
bought.
The golden chances I had then
Are lost and will not come again.
Today I cannot be enticed
For everything’s so overpriced.
The deals of yesteryear are dead;
The market’s soft—and so’s my head.
Last night I had a fearful dream,
I know I wakened with a scream:
Some Indians approached my bed—
For trinkets on the barrelhead
(In dollar bills worth twenty-four
And nothing less and nothing more)
They’d sell Manhattan Isle to me.
The most I’d go was twenty-three.
The redmen scowled: “Not on a bet!”
And sold to Peter Minuit.
At times a teardrop drowns my eye
For deals I had, but did not buy;
And now life’s saddest words I pen—
“IF ONLY I’D INVESTED THEN!”
—Anonymous

Box 1.2

Investor’s Lament

C H A P T E R

2

Multiple Paths to
Building Wealth
Now you’re going to see why real estate investing offers you greater opportunities to build wealth than any other type of investment. With real
estate, you can make money in dozens of different ways. For starters,
here are 16 potential paths to proﬁt:
◆ Appreciation in market values
◆ Inﬂation
◆ Cash ﬂows
◆ Mortgage payoff
◆ Buy below market
◆ Create property value
◆ Create site value
◆ Create neighborhood value

◆ Condominium conversions
◆ Improved management
◆ More-proﬁtable market strategy
◆ Tax shelter
◆ Discounted notes and tax deeds
◆ Real estate stocks (REITs, home

builders, mortgage lenders)

Appreciation in Market Values
Over periods of 5 to 10 years, nearly all types of properties gain in value
because population, jobs, incomes, and wealth (buying power) grow
faster than the amount of new construction. Over the long term, more
people with more money consistently push real estate prices up.
“Okay,” you retort,“but that was then and this is now. Surely prices
can’t continue to increase as they have in the past?” I answer,“They can

19

20

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

and they will.” To see the future, just weigh together these dominant
trends:
1. Population growth. During the next 20 years, the population of the United States will increase by 40 million people.
2. Incomes. During the next 20 years, employees, entrepreneurs, professionals, and business owners will see their incomes rise by over 50 percent.
3. Vacation homes. During the next 20 years, at least 10 million
more Americans (and foreign nationals) will choose to buy vacation homes within the United States.
4. Echo boomers. During the next 20 years, more than 60 million echo boomers (children and grandchildren of the baby
boomers) will enter the housing market to buy homes.
5. Restrictions on development. During the next 20 years,
zoning, environmental laws, building regulations, and land
shortages will continue to restrict development in those areas
where most people want to live.
6. Construction costs. During the next 20 years, the costs to
construct houses (and other types of buildings) will follow
their past trend line upward.
7. Immigrants and minorities. Currently only 40 percent of
our fastest growing immigrant and minority groups (Hispanics, blacks, Asians) own their own homes. In contrast, more
than 75 percent of whites live in homes they own. With government programs and lender outreach efforts in full swing,
during the next 20 years people in these minority and immigrant groups will continue to buy homes in record numbers.
Federal, state, and local governments in cooperation with
private lenders will be working hard to close the home ownership gap.
8. Investors. During the next 20 years, more than 60 million
baby boomers will need a retirement income. They will increasingly turn to investment real estate to meet this need. Demand for property as an investment will continue to
explode—as it has during the past 5 years.
You don’t need advanced knowledge of economics and demographics to recognize the fact that every major social trend is pushing
real estate prices upward.

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

21

Inﬂation
Each year and every year the Federal Reserve system increases the
money supply. As more money chases after a slowly increasing supply of
properties, property prices go up—even without an overall favorable
change in the underlying forces of supply and demand (market appreciation). The Federal Reserve speciﬁcally designs its
monetary policies to create a modest (1.5 to 3.0 perEven without
cent) annual gain in the Consumer Price Index
market
(CPI).
Sometimes, though, the Fed loses control of inappreciation,
ﬂationary price increases (late 1940s, the entire
inﬂation will
1970s, early to mid 1980s). During those superpush real estate
heated, inﬂationary times, real estate prices will
often experience inﬂationary gains of 6 to 12 perprices up.
cent a year. Buy now and then cheer for inﬂation.

Interest Rates and Inﬂation
Journalists repeatedly perpetuate the myth that our so-called “current
historically low mortgage interest rates” have caused the recent price
run-ups in housing.
In reality, today’s 30-year mortgage interest rates of 5 to 7 percent
only seem low relative to those mortgage rates of 8
to 16 percent that we experienced throughout
Today’s mortgage
much of the 1970s and 1980s. During most of our
country’s 225-plus years of history, mortgage interinterest rates sit
est rates typically have ranged between 3 and 6 perabove their longcent. So, today’s rates actually stand toward the
term average—not
high-average end of history—not the historically
low. But, still, you might ask, what happens to real
below.
estate prices if interest rates do go up?

Higher Interest Rates Are Caused by Higher Inﬂation
Long-term interest rates climbed dramatically during the 1970s and
1980s because the Consumer Price Index (inﬂation) jumped from the
somewhat mild annual levels of 2.5 to 4.0 percent of the early to mid

22

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

1960s all the way up to 13 percent in 1982. And for the record, you
might note that during those 16 years of increasing inﬂation and skyrocketing interest rates (from 1970’s 6.0 percent to 1981’s 16 percent),
most property values nearly tripled.
Although higher inﬂation drives up interest rates, inﬂation also
drives up rent levels and construction costs. Even better for investors
who own real estate, when inﬂation heats up, the smart money ﬂees ﬁnancial assets (stocks and bonds) in favor of hard assets (real estate, gold,
collectibles). As a result, property prices are pushed even higher as stock
and bond prices stagnate or decline.
For example, in 1964, the stock market’s Dow Jones Industrial Average peaked at close to 1,000. In 1981, it sat at less than 800—20 percent below its high mark of 17 years earlier. During
this same 17-year period of higher interest rates and
During periods of
inﬂation, the nationwide median house price
zoomed from $25,000 to nearly $75,000.
high interest rates,
History proves that over lengthy periods,
real estate strongly
higher interest rates do not hurt property values.
outperforms
Quite the contrary, higher interest rates (which
stocks and bonds.
merely reﬂect high inﬂation) propel property prices
to new record heights.

Higher Interest Rates? Lower Interest Rates? You Gain Either Way
Say you buy today and secure a long-term mortgage interest rate of 6.5
percent. If interest rates go down, you can reﬁnance and take advantage
of lower payments (more on this topic later).
Yet, if inﬂation again goes wild and interest rates head up to 8, 10, 12
percent or higher, you’ll gain as inﬂation pushes the price of your property up and slices the real dollar (inﬂation-adjusted) amount of your mortgage balance. You borrow dollars when their
purchasing power is strong. You pay them back
You proﬁt
when their buying power has fallen. You gain. Your
lender loses. Unlike mortgage lenders in many counregardless of
tries, lenders in the United States must carry the adwhether interest
verse risks created by both higher interest rates and
rates head up or
lower interest rates. When rates go down, you can reﬁnance. When rates go up due to inﬂation, you can
down.
collect higher rents and pay your loan off in cheap

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

23

dollars. Regardless of which direction interest rates move, real estate investors (mortgage borrowers) reap the gains for themselves.

Cycling through History
Nothing I’ve written denies the hard fact of real estate cycles. Every real
estate investor knows that rent levels and property prices seldom move
upward at an even, steady pace. In some years, prices bolt ahead. In others, they merely crawl. And every now and then, short-term events (excessive job loss, temporary overbuilding) can send property prices
lower. But rather than spell doom, these cycles can be used by savvy investors to enhance their proﬁts.
Personally, I love down markets because they make buying much
easier. More important, throughout this book, I will
show you how to proﬁt in any type of real estate
market. You simply adapt your strategy and techUse the down
niques to whatever new market conditions are
cycle to pick up
emerging. Savvy real estate investors ignore the
properties at
media chatter about bubbles and peaks, hard times,
and depressed markets. Instead, they work the availdepressed prices.
able opportunities—no matter what type of market
they face.

Cash Flows
Most real estate produces cash ﬂows from rent collections. Even though
today’s cash ﬂows (in many high-priced parts of the country) currently
throw off unleveraged returns of just 4 to 8 percent a year, those cash
ﬂows are sure to increase over time. When blended together, inﬂation
and market demand can push rents up an average of 3 to 5 percent a
year. Within 15 years, today’s rent level of $1,000 a month can increase
to $1,500 to $1,800 per month (or possibly more).
You also will be able to boost your cash ﬂows during periods when
interest rates decline. Say that, due to a reﬁnance at a lower interest rate,
the mortgage payment on your investment property falls from $2,000
per month to $1,700 per month. That reﬁnance just put another $300 a
month of cash ﬂow into your pocket.

24

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

Mortgage Payoff (Amortization)
Imagine for a moment that inﬂation ends and market demand (property
appreciation) stalls. You collect only enough rents from your property to
pay your operating expenses and mortgage payments. With stagnant
rent collections and property values, have you made a poor investment?
Not at all.
As you pay off your mortgage balance, your equity in the property
continues to grow—even without an increase in your property’s value.

Your Equity Grows Tenfold
Assume, for example, you buy a $100,000 property with a $10,000 down
payment. After 30 years, you own that property (still
valued at $100,000) free and clear. Even without
You don’t need
positive cash ﬂows or price increases, you’ve multiplied your original investment of $10,000 ten times
price increases to
over. In terms of compound interest, that gain from
make money in
amortization (paying off the mortgage with rent colreal estate.
lections) alone equals an annual rate of return of 8
percent.

Amortization Alone Often Beats Other Investments
You might not think 8 percent sounds like much of a return. But it’s certainly better than bonds, annuities, certiﬁcates of deposit, and even
stocks (during many decades of our economic history). Indeed, the famous stock market bull,Wharton professor Jeremy Siegel, forecasts average stock returns over the next 10 to 20 years of just 6 to 8 percent a
year. Why? Because stocks today remain highly overvalued relative to historical norms.
Earn 8–12 percent
Remember, too, I’ve assumed here that your 8
percent property returns result only from mortgage
a year just by
payoff, whereas the returns from the other investpaying off your
ments cited refer to total returns (dividends or inmortgage with
terest and asset appreciation).
As an aside, note that had your rent collections
rent collections.
permitted you to pay off your mortgage loan in 20

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

25

years instead of 30 years, your return from paying off your property’s
mortgage would climb to an annual rate of 12 percent.

Buy Below Market Value
In real estate you can make money the moment you buy a property.
Unlike most other investments, you can buy real estate for less than its
market value. Distressed owners, owners who want to sell fast and
hassle-free, lenders who own foreclosures (called REOs), and poorly informed sellers frequently part with their properties at prices (or
terms) that immediately put dollars into your net
worth.
Bargain prices
Some investors ﬂip properties they buy at a
bargain price to generate quick cash. Others hold
help you build
for the long term and use the bargain price (or
wealth fast.
terms) to boost their long-term proﬁts. Either way,
bargain prices ﬁll your bank accounts with money.

Create Value with Property Improvements
Most investors (and homeowners) fail to strategically improve their
properties to maximize values. As a result, entrepreneurial investors—an
investor like you who can spot opportunities for improvements—can
dramatically and quickly boost the values of the properties you buy.
Plus, when you choose to operate entrepreneurially, you also gain because your properties bring in higher rents.

Multiple Ways to Improve
When we talk about property improvement, most owners look only for
proﬁt-making cosmetic changes: Lay some new carpet, paint the walls,
clean up the yard, and put new tile ﬂoors in the kitchen and bathrooms.
As you will see, though, in Chapters 13 and 14, you can (and
should) go far beyond cosmetics. As a truly creative entrepreneurial investor, you will develop a total ﬁx-up and renovation plan that may

26

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

involve kitchen and bath remodeling, reconﬁguring a ﬂoor plan, adding
skylights or ceiling height, and attic or basement conversions.
As an entrepreneurial investor, you will survey competing properties, look for unsatisﬁed tenant (buyer) wants, and
then strategically design a plan of improvement to
Create value with
create the wow factor. With wow factors in place, you
will not only add to the value of your building, you
wow factors.
will attract topﬂight tenants and collect higher rents.

Don’t Overlook Site Enhancement
As part of your total property improvement plan, you will also focus on
potential value improvements that you can create with the site. Maybe
you can create a view to a newly beautiﬁed backyard, add parking
spaces, eliminate a drainage problem, or even slice off part of the lot to
construct another residence.
In high-priced areas of the country, site value can easily account for
more than 50 percent of a property’s total value. When you ﬁnd better
ways to use the property’s site, you immediately boost the property’s value.
Walkways, fencing, landscaping, driveways, storage, and redevelopment
may all offer promise for proﬁt. As an alert, entrepreneurial owner, you will
think through a dozen or more potential ways to enhance site value.

Improve the Neighbors and Neighborhood
“Buy in the best neighborhood you can afford. The best neighborhoods always appreciate the fastest.” So says one of the oldest clichés in real estate.
But, in fact, it’s the turnaround neighborhoods that can often shoot up in
value the most. Throughout the United States, many once downtrodden
and shunned neighborhoods have experienced gentriﬁcation.
Although some investors wait for these neighborhoods to show strong signs of renewal, other investors jump in early while prices are still rockLook for up-andbottom cheap. They ﬁnd neighborhoods that show
coming
potential. Then they work with other property owners, neighborhood residents, local government, and
neighborhoods.
not-for-proﬁts to create community revitalization.

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

27

Either way, you can proﬁt big. Even during those periods when average property prices and rent levels merely edge up (level off or turn
down), some neighborhoods remain prime candidates for rapid price escalation. Turnaround neighborhoods clearly give you the chance to realize every investor’s dream,“Buy low, sell high.”

Convert the Use
From time to time some real estate markets get overbuilt with apartments, ofﬁce buildings, shopping centers, gas stations, or other types of
property. When such overbuilding occurs, alert investors go bargain
hunting. Although some bargain hunters hold for the long term, others
go for the quick proﬁts by converting properties from one use to another.
For example, New York City currently suffers from a glut of ofﬁce
space and diminishing ofﬁce building rents. In contrast, housing prices
and apartment rents continue to rise in response to New York’s perpetual shortage of homes and apartments. So, what route to proﬁts are
some New York real estate investors taking? You guessed it. They’re buying ofﬁce buildings on the cheap and converting this excess ofﬁce space
into apartments and condominiums.

Dynamic Markets Precipitate Change
When I-70 came through my hometown, slow-to-adapt motel owners
along the previously heavily traveled route U.S. 40 went broke. Alert real
estate investors, though, spotted opportunity. They bought the defunct
motels at rock-bottom prices and then proﬁtably converted them into efﬁciency apartments for the growing number of single persons within
the city’s population.
In our dynamic economy, the need for real estate
continues to grow. But the need for speciﬁc property
Stay alert for the
uses ebbs and ﬂows. When oversupply or tough times
chance to proﬁt
hit some types of property uses, that situation spells
proﬁt possibilities for those investors who can ﬁgure
from conversions.
out a better way to use now obsolete (or unprofitable) buildings.

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

28

Neighborhood Changes
For the past two decades, many close-in neighborhoods with obsolete
factories and warehouses have experienced a renaissance as real estate
investors bought cheap, old industrial buildings and converted them to
loft apartment buildings. New York City’s Soho District, San Francisco’s
South of Market (SOMA) area, and Chicago’s near north neighborhood
stand out as prime examples of this ongoing trend.
Likewise, as commercial areas sometimes encroach into residential neighborhoods, smart propWatch for
erty investors have successfully sought zoning
neighborhoods
changes and then converted large houses into professional ofﬁces aimed at those ever-expanding lewhere uses are
gions of lawyers, accountants, dentists, real estate
changing.
brokers, and insurance agents.

Condos into Apartments
In the early 1990s, I worked with an investment group that bought controlling interest in defunct condominium projects. After the Texas bust
of the late 1980s, large blocks of condo units were selling for as little as
$15,000 per unit.
Yet, as apartment rentals these condo units would easily bring $350
to $425 a month. Given these sinking condo prices and relatively high
rent levels, more than a few condo projects were essentially converted
into apartment buildings. Then, when condo prices revived in the late
1990s, our investment group was able to reconvert and sell off individual
apartments at $40,000 to $60,000 per unit.

Apartments into Condos
More recently, rapidly escalating condo prices, rising vacancy rates in
apartment projects, and softening rents have encouraged increasing
numbers of investors to buy apartment buildings and convert them into
condominium developments. Similarly, facing soft ofﬁce markets, some
investors are converting ofﬁce buildings into commercial condominiums. Large numbers of doctors, lawyers, and accountants (or even other
investors) are signing up to buy them.

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

Ride the condo
cycle to earn big
proﬁts.

29

Always remember that as various property
prices and rent levels change, the opportunity to
convert from one use to another can yield solid gold
proﬁts. (More on this topic in Chapter 14.)

Manage and Market Your Properties More Proﬁtably
As you might suspect, most small-time investors mismanage their rental
properties. Why? Because they get lazy. They fail to keep up with
changes in the market.They fail to make desirable improvements to their
properties. They fail to develop a sound strategy of target marketing.
All in all, such widespread failures mean that
you can almost certainly boost the proﬁts from any
Effective
property by simply managing and marketing it more
management
effectively. And as a bonus, managing more effectively
requires you to put in less time and effort.
yields easy proﬁts.

Protect Your Proﬁts from the IRS (Tax Shelter)
To build wealth, you must protect your earnings from the greedy hand of
government. Fortunately, the income tax laws permit owners of property to escape taxation in at least four important ways:
◆ Serial home selling
◆ Section 1031 exchanges
◆ Depreciation
◆ Retirement planning

Serial Home Sellers
Growing numbers of Americans are proﬁting from investing in their
homes tax free. Here’s how it works.
Generally, when you own an investment property, you will pay a
capital gains tax on your resale proﬁts at the time you sell. However,
when you sell your personal residence, your gains come to you tax-free

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

30

up to $250,000 ($500,000 for couples). As long as you have lived in the
property for two of the previous ﬁve years, you need not even report
this proﬁt to the IRS.
Even better, you can repeat this purchase and sale every two years.
Ideally, you ﬁnd a home with strong ﬁx-up and renovation potential. Buy
it. Create value. Resell and reinvest your tax-free
proﬁts in additional properties. Continue this proSerial renovators
cess until you achieve your desired level of wealth
(or until you tire of moving).
earn big tax-free
For singles or couples without children, serial
proﬁts.
home ownership can prove to be an outstanding
method of generating relatively quick, tax-free
proﬁts. Or if you do have kids, get them involved. Put them to work.
They’ll learn some valuable lessons about real estate renovating and investing.

Section 1031 Exchanges
In addition to buying and selling a series of personal residences tax free,
you can also sell your investment properties tax free. All you need to do
is follow the rules as set forth in Section 1031 of the Internal Revenue
Code. Specialist realty pros can easily set up the necessary paperwork to
pull off these tax-free “exchanges.” I put exchange in quotations because
it’s really a misnomer. You do not actually have to trade your property
with another owner. You simply sell one property and buy another one
within a period of several months.

Depreciation
In most businesses, the IRS taxes your net cash annual income. But when
you own rental properties, you can shelter (protect) much of your cash
ﬂow from taxes by using a noncash tax deduction called depreciation.
Say your apartment building (exclusive of land
value) is worth $500,000. Your pretax cash income
Depreciation gives
from that property equals $20,000 per year. But you
you tax-free
don’t pay taxes on that $20,000 of income. You only pay
taxes on $1,950 ($20,000 of income less $18,150 for alincome.
lowable depreciation).

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

31

What happens to that $18,150 deduction for depreciation if, say,
your rental property yields only $10,000 a year in pretax cash income?
In that situation, you may be able to write off (deduct) that $8,150
($18,150 depreciation less $10,000 property income) of unused “loss”
from the taxable amounts you earn from your other taxable income
(wages, business proﬁts, interest, dividends).

Tax-Deferred Retirement Plans
Do you own an IRA retirement plan? If so, you may be able to invest all
or part of it in real estate.
Unfortunately, most people believe that they can only invest these
retirement funds in corporate America’s stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or
money market accounts. Wrong! Patrick Rice fully explains these real estate investing techniques in his book, IRA Wealth: Revolutionary IRA
Strategies for Real Estate Investment (Garden City Park, N.Y., Square
One, 2003, p. 3). Here’s what Rice says:
After the sharp decline of the stock market, many of us could
only stand by and watch as our retirement savings lost their
accumulated value. Few [investors] knew that there was an alternative which offered both safety and growth. That alternative is real estate. . . . Contrary to what you may have
believed, it is possible and perfectly legal to hold real estate in
an IRA account—and to enjoy unprecedented returns.
If you have built up funds in a tax-favored retirement fund, I urge
you to talk with a ﬁnancial pro or read Rice’s book. Quite likely, you will
ﬁnd it wise to diversify at least a portion of your IRA monies into real estate. IRA funds invested in real estate build up tax free within that account just the same as would stocks, bonds, and CDs.

Taxes: Summing Up
The tax laws remain too complex for me to itemize and detail in this beginning book on investing in real estate. Nevertheless, please appreciate
the fact that, to a large degree, you can protect your real estate proﬁts
from the IRS.

MINDSET + KNOWLEDGE = WEALTH

32

To really learn how to avoid taxes on real estate, I recommend
these two books:
◆ Aggressive Tax Avoidance for Real Estate Investors, John T. Reed

(available at www.johntreed.com)
◆ Real Estate Investors Tax Guide, Vernon Hoven (Dearborn,

2003)
Throughout this book, I will focus on showing you how to make
money in real estate. In complement, Reed and Hoven show you how to
pocket these proﬁts without losing a good-sized portion to the government.

Discounted Notes, Tax Liens, Tax Deeds, and Realty Stocks
Want to make money in real estate without managing tenants or lifting a
paintbrush? Then consider the high-return business of buying (and perhaps selling) discounted notes and mortgages.

The Basics of Discounted Notes
Quite often, sellers of houses and investment properties carry back
(owner ﬁnance) some or all of their buyers’ purchase price. Buyers then
make monthly payments directly to the sellers.
After some period of time passes, a seller may decide that he or she
wants cash instead of those monthly payments. To get this cash, the
seller (note holder) sells the note to another investor—usually for an
amount somewhat less than the balance on the note owed by the buyers
of the original noteholder’s property.
For example, assume I sell you a property and
Buy $100 bills for
carry back a mortgage note for $25,000. After a few
years of payments, the remaining balance on this note
$80—or less.
drops to, say, $21,500. I now want cash. To entice an
investor to buy this note from me, I would likely
agree to sell it for $17,500.
You might wonder,“Why sell a $21,500 mortgage for just $17,500?”
Because that’s the way this market works. In most cases, noteholders
who wish to sell must accept a discount.

Multiple Paths to Building Wealth

33

How much discount? It all depends on a number of factors. Just realize that tens of thousands of investors throughout the United States are
making outstanding returns in this ﬁeld. If you choose to, you can too.
(For a good description of this technique, see The Stefanachik Method,
Morrow, 1994.)

Tax Liens and Tax Deeds
When homeowners or real estate investors fail to pay their property taxes,
local governments place a tax lien against the property. If the taxes remain
unpaid, the government will eventually sell the property via a tax deed.
The “free and clear” infomercials of Ed Beck promise to show investors
how they can make money buying up these tax liens and tax deeds.
Although not quite so easy and risk-free as Beck’s infomercial
makes it sound, once you learn your area’s rules and procedures, you can
earn tens of thousands of dollars a year by buying these governmentissued certiﬁcates.

Stocks of REITs and Homebuilders
I strongly encourage you to directly own and manage real estate. By involving yourself directly in the real estate market, you will outearn passive investors in stocks by a long shot. Nevertheless, as one more real
estate investing alternative, you can buy the stocks issued by real estate
investment trusts (REITs) and large homebuilders such as Toll Brothers,
K&B, Lennar, and WPP. REITs are companies that own and manage large
properties such as ofﬁce buildings, shopping centers, warehouses, and
apartment complexes.
Long after the general stock market downturn
of early 2000, the stocks of REITs and homebuilders
Real estate stocks
continued to register positive total returns of 10 to
add both diversity
25 percent a year. Also, unlike the stocks of most
companies, REIT stocks typically pay cash dividends
and yield to your
of 6 to 9 percent a year.
stock portfolio.
Any investor who wants to build wealth in
stocks should deﬁnitely own shares in at least several REITs and homebuilders. These companies not only offer good returns, they will reduce the overall risk of your investment portfolio. Real
estate stocks diversify your holdings of stocks and bonds.

P A R T

TWO

How to Raise the Money

C H A P T E R

3

Strengthen Your Credit Power

If you’re like many beginning real estate investors, you may lack substantial sums for a down payment. You may suffer from credit blemishes. Or
maybe both of these shortcomings trouble you. So, if you want to convince a lender (or property seller) to shower a huge pile of cash on
you—a total stranger—then think about your personal proﬁle the same
way a lender (seller) does:
◆ Consistency
◆ Character
◆ Credit

By far, the most important of these three Cs is Credit. With strong
credit—even without much cash or income—you will ﬁnd it easy to buy
investment real estate. Yet credit’s not the only thing that counts. If you
lack a platinum-power credit score, you can still dress yourself up for
success. Emphasize your consistent ability to perform and your sterling
character.

Consistency: Fast Track or Flake
Have you job-hopped or job-ﬂopped? Have you lived in more places than
you can remember? Did you jump through six majors before you ﬁnished community college? Do you suffer bouts of binge spending and
37

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

38

borrowing? Does your background look more like a tossed salad that’s
been thrown against a wall than the impeccable dinner presentation of
an expensive French restaurant? If so, you’ve got some explaining to do.
Loan representatives, loan underwriters, and sellers who offer ﬁnancing want to make sense of your life as it’s displayed on your mortgage application.1 They want to evaluate where you’ve been and where
you’re headed.
For you to satisfy their penchant for consistency, ﬁgure a theme or
angle that ties your loose ends together. Give the lender conﬁdence that
six months after you’ve closed your loan, you won’t
abandon the property to join a Hare Krishna colony
Tell the lender a
or move to Soho and fulﬁll your dream of becoming
a romance novelist. The lender wants to envision
life story that
your steady path toward job promotions and career
makes sense.
advancement. In borderline cases, a good story can
make the difference.
All in all, you want to persuade the lender, seller, or both that the
path you’re traveling is leading you toward success.

Character Counts
The famous banker, J. P. Morgan, declared,“I wouldn’t loan money to a
man I did not trust on all the bonds of Christendom.” Don’t you feel the
same way? Well, so does your lender (seller). You’ve got to convince the
lender (seller) that you’ll honor your obligations and commitments. Your
credit score provides one indicator. But, when desirable or necessary,
bolster the impression this score creates with other types of written information:
1. Employer. If your lender requires a completed VOE form
(veriﬁcation of employment), ask your supervisor to enclose a
letter that commends your dependability, integrity, and responsibility at work.

1. Throughout much of this chapter’s discussion, I will use the term “lender” to include sellers
who offer their buyers owner ﬁnancing (called OWC).

Strengthen Your Credit Power

39

2. Credit blemishes. Explain how misplaced bills, your vacation, a move of residence, or other non-character-indicting reasons account for these lapses that you deeply regret. Even
better, discuss the new bill-paying systems that you have now
put in place to prevent future lapses.
3. Credit wreck. Explain a serious problem as a once-in-alifetime, beyond-your-control event that you coped with as
honorably as possible. If your lapses really were due to irresponsibility, emphasize that “you’ve learned your lesson the
hard way” and now live well within your means. Put together
objective evidence to support your “new you” claims.
4. Personal references. In the old days of mortgage lending,
younger borrowers were awarded loans merely on the basis of
family character and reputation.2 “Why I’ve known Luke Jr.’s
family for 30 years,” the loan rep says. “They’re great people.
Loan approved.” Now, in our big-city, automated world, personal references to lenders seldom count for much. Still, if
you’ve established good rapport with people who
could prove inﬂuential, it wouldn’t hurt to enlist
their help.
If your credit
score is low,

When desirable, accent the fact that you’re a good
credit risk by showing alternative documentation.
Otherwise, the lender will infer your dependability
good character.
only from the shading provided by your formal
record of credit and consistency. When adverse
facts color too dark a picture, try to add some brighter highlights to the
mix. Think. What evidence can you come up with to bolster your credit
proﬁle?
What loans or merchant accounts have you repaid on time that
don’t show up in your credit ﬁle? Will your current and past landlords
vouch for you? Have you consistently paid your utilities and phone bills
promptly? Often, lenders will accept any or all of this alternative evidence to bolster your reliability and good character.
document your

2. In fact, many loan applications used to include spaces for personal references similar to those
found on job applications.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

40

Credit Scores Count Most
With a very strong credit score, lenders will lay aside their magnifying
glass. With strong credit you will need to worry far less about high qualifying ratios, low down payments, self-employment
(difﬁcult to determine income), piles of veriﬁcaLearn how to
tions, inconsistent life patterns, or character ﬂaws.
As a strong credit borrower you will win the lowest
raise your credit
interest rate, the best terms, and the fastest apscore.
proval. You need never suffer the claw marks of
predatory (hard money) lenders.
In contrast, if you do need to improve your credit score, here’s the
knowledge you will need to gain that platinum-power borrowing status.

What Is Credit Scoring?
Through credit scoring, lenders try to minimize individual human judgment in the mortgage lending decision. Credit scoring data with auto
loans, department store accounts, and credit cards proves that computer
statistical programs can distinguish among platinum, gold, copper, lead,
and plastic borrowers far better than back-ofﬁce loan clerks or frontofﬁce loan reps.
To create these credit scoring programs, math whizzes study the
credit proﬁles, borrowing habits, and payback records of hundreds of
thousands of people. Then they search for statistically signiﬁcant correlations that tend to rate borrowers along a continuum from “walks on
water” (say, 800 or higher) to “let’s pray they drown” (say, 500 or lower).
Supposedly, credit scores may range from 350 to 900, but more than 75
percent of Americans fall within the range of 600 to 800.

Credit Scoring Spreads Its Inﬂuence
If you’ve received a preapproved credit card in the mail, or obtained instant credit at Sears, Home Depot, or Best Buy, you’ve been run through
a credit scoring program. That’s why the store could make the credit decision so quickly with only minimal information from you (Social Security number, name, address). Even insurance companies (especially auto
and homeowners) are now turning to credit scores to decide whether to

Strengthen Your Credit Power

41

insure you, and if so, at what price. Employers, too,
have started running credit scores on job applicants
and, in some cases, current employees.
insurers also judge
We are approaching the time when people
you by your credit
will no longer say,“You are what you eat.” Instead,
score.
they’ll remark, “You are your credit score.” With
that world fast approaching, you must do all you
can to strengthen your score. And if your score now
shines out in platinum territory, learn to do what’s necessary to keep it
there. In the United States of tomorrow, Mensa will become old hat.
You will gather far more prestige and practical beneﬁt when you’re eligible to join the FICO 800 club.
Employers and

Your perfect credit

Your Credit Score Doesn’t Necessary Represent
Your Credit Strength

record doesn’t
mean you’ll
receive a perfect
credit score.

Contrary to what many loan reps (and others) believe, your credit score doesn’t necessarily represent
your credit strength. You may never have paid a bill
late in your life and still earn a credit score of less
than 660.

Credit Scoring Doesn’t Rate You Personally The credit scorers select certain characteristics that you share with others who have (or have
not) paid their bills as scheduled. Then, based on these selected characteristics, the scorer’s mathematical formula assigns you a number. Supposedly, this assessment accurately gauges the risks you present to the lender.
But it doesn’t. Why? Because you are a unique individual. Although you
share some similarities with this computer sample of debtors, you also differ in many ways of which the credit scoring programs have no knowledge. These unaccounted-for differences may give you far more (or far
less) borrowing credibility than your credit score indicates.
You can easily see the parallel here with SAT scores and other college
admission tests. If you fail to register a top score, you can kiss Stanford
goodbye—unless, that is, you write a superlative admissions essay and beef
up your application with science fair awards and club presidencies.
You’re Not Just a Number Remember Bob Seger’s classic hit, “Feel
Like a Number”? When you apply for mortgage credit, don’t let the

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

42

lender make you feel like a number. Yes, do all that you can to boost your
credit score. But never let a lender (or seller) confuse the total you with
your credit score.3 By the same token, never assume that your astute loan
rep and underwriter will intuitively recognize your worthwhile qualities.
Just as the aspiring Stanford applicant must document why she deserves
admission, you, too, must persuasively document why the lender (seller)
can trust you to pay back that $250,000 you’re trying to ﬁnance.

Discover Your Credit Scores
To discover your credit scores, go to www.myﬁco.com. There you can
see (for a fee) all of your credit reports (Trans Union, Experian, Equifax).
Each report will also include an associated credit score.
The three scores provided for you may not vary much from each
other. But sometimes they do. That’s because Equifax, Experian, and TU
don’t share credit data with each other. Different credit data yield different credit scores. Big differences in credit bureau data may yield big differences in each of the credit scores they assign you.

Want to Save Money?
If you don’t want to spend the money to obtain credit information,
you’ve got several other choices:
1. Mortgage loan sites. Some mortgage websites will provide
you a free, no obligation credit score that simulates, but
doesn’t precisely mirror, the Equifax-FICO score (trade-named
Beacon). However, I have found that these free simulated
scores do not provide consistent results, nor do their scores
accurately mimic your FICO scores. Because most mortgage
lenders use FICO scores, simulated FICO ﬁgures provide little
useful information.
2. Consumerinfo.com. This website operated by Experian will
give you a free credit report, but it also will automatically en-

3. Unless, maybe, your credit score makes you look better than you deserve.

Strengthen Your Credit Power

43

roll you in a $79.95 credit-monitoring service. Cancel this service within 30 days and you owe nothing.
3. Free reports. Various states require credit bureaus to provide
reports for free (or at nominal cost). Also, under federal law
you may receive free reports from each of the credit repositories if (1) you’re unemployed and looking for work, (2) you’re
on welfare, or (3) you’ve been turned down for credit during
the past 30 days.
4. General commentary. For the latest (usually critical) commentary about credit scoring and credit reporting, go to
www.creditscoring.com and www.creditaccuracy.com. Also,
the Federal Trade Commission maintains consumer information on all types of credit issues at www.ftc.gov.

How You Can Improve Your Credit Score
Credit scorers place your credit data into their computer programs and
out pops a number. But they won’t tell you precisely how they calculated that ﬁgure. However, after you’ve paid your fee at myﬁco.com, the
website info will give you some pointers on how to improve your Beacon®-FICO® score. To learn how much your score actually does improve (if any) over the next 12 months, you will need to pay another fee.
For that cost, you get four more periodic Beacon®-FICO® reports.
Unfortunately, the information provided by FICO still doesn’t go far
enough. It’s more like,“try this (really, pay us) to see what happens.”You
really can’t tell ahead of time the speciﬁc score boost that suggested
changes might bring about. Nevertheless, piecing together clues from
myﬁco.com and several helpful loan reps, here are some good tips on
how to raise your credit scores:
1. Number of open credit accounts. You can have too few or
too many. The optimum number probably ranges between
four and six. One highly paid, credit perfect (no lates) executive I know scored 640. After closing the 6 newest of her 12
credit card accounts, her score went to 780. (But it took six
months before her score climbed up to that level.)
2. Balances. Open accounts with balances reduce your score
more than open accounts per se.

44

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

3. Balances/limits. Numerous accounts with balances sitting
close to the limit will bring down your score.
4. Credit inquiries. Whenever someone checks your credit ﬁle,
it counts against your score. However, multiple checks within,
say, two weeks may not hurt as much as if it appears that
you’re merely shopping different lenders for one loan. Your
personal inquiries don’t affect your score.
5. Payment record. Obviously, late payments hurt your score.
But, supposedly FICO doesn’t distinguish between late mortgage payments and late payments on your Visa or student
loan. (Mortgage lenders, though, most certainly do care. Always pay your mortgage or rent ﬁrst.)
6. Recency counts. Late payments two years ago don’t hurt as
much as two months ago.
7. Black marks. Multiple lates on multiple accounts, collections, unpaid judgments, and tax liens devastate your score.
8. Kiss of death. Go straight to credit scoring purgatory if
you’re within two years of a past bankruptcy discharge or a
foreclosure sale. Chapter 13 bankruptcy plans and credit
counseling debt management plans also count heavily and
negatively.
Myﬁco.com also shows that some categories weigh more than others:
◆ Age of credit (15 percent)
◆ Mix of credit (10 percent)
◆ Amount of balances (30 percent)
◆ Payment history (35 percent)
◆ Recent credit inquiries (10 percent)

The above clues shed some light on the credit scoring process, but far
too little. Perhaps most importantly, they do show why “perfect credit”in
the sense of “no lates” does not necessarily generate the highest FICO
score. To improve your score, you must not only pay your bills on time
but also manage your credit according to the likes and dislikes of the
FICO (or other) credit-scoring programs.
Garbage In, Garbage Out Computer data researchers everywhere
know of GIGO (garbage in, garbage out). Clearly, this saying also applies
to credit reporting. Credit scoring computer programs pull in raw data

Strengthen Your Credit Power

45

from the ﬁles of Equifax,Trans Union, or Experian. If your credit ﬁles include errors (as do at least 50 percent of all ﬁles), then your credit scores
also will err.
Examine Your Reports Now Seventy-ﬁve percent (or more) of mortgage loan applications require tri-merged credit reports and correspondingly three credit scores per borrower.
Because each credit repository holds more
Don’t wait until
than 200 million ﬁles and registers billions
of computer-generated entries every year,
you need credit.
you are unlikely to ﬁnd three ﬂawless, perCheck for errors
fectly matched reports. Thus inconsistencies
now.
and mistakes can slow down or derail your
mortgage approval.
What to Look For You’re looking for errors, but what kinds of errors?
More than you might think:
1. Inconsistency. Evaluate whether your three reports differ
signiﬁcantly from each other. Does each report accurately
show your credit accounts along with an appropriate “open”
or “closed”?
2. Late payments. Make sure that all late payments shown
were in fact lates. Also, check the category of lates 30, 60, and
90 days or over. Sometimes creditors overstate the number of
days a payment has been late. Watch for rolling lates; you miss
a payment, then get back on schedule. Every subsequent payment may show up as late.
3. Balances. Verify that the outstanding balances and credit limits don’t misstate your true credit position. Remember, when
balances push against limits, your credit score goes down.
4. Disputed claims. Have you justiﬁably refused to pay any
creditor’s bills? Health clubs (and other service contract
providers) often continue to bill (and report unpaid) fees for
membership that customers canceled long ago.
5. Credit experience counts. Do the reports accurately indicate the length of time each account has been opened?
6. Omissions. Have you established excellent credit with a
credit card, landlord, or retail merchant that does not show
up in your credit ﬁles? Some creditors withhold excellent

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

46

7.
8.
9.

10.

11.
12.

payment records and balance information. Why? If your credit
score goes up, that lender’s competitors will start mailing you
offers to switch to their better terms or higher limits.
Tax liens. This type of claim nearly always must be paid before your mortgage loan closes.
Judgments. Ditto for judgments unless the statute of limitations has passed.
Collections/write-offs. For collections and write-offs,
lenders may require that you settle them. Or the lender might
calculate your qualifying total debt ratio as if you were paying
5 percent of these delinquent balances each month. If you
combine a high current credit score with write-offs more than
ﬁve years old, the lender may simply ignore them.
Time limits. See if any derogatory information shows up in
violation of these legal time limits: credit inquiries (2 years);
foreclosure (7 years); lates, collections, write-offs (7 years);
judgments and tax liens (usually until statute of limitations
runs out). To calculate “time limits,” work back from the “date
of last activity” on the debt. Also, creditors often sell their bad
debts to credit vultures. These outﬁts may report debts beyond their lawful date of removal. Beware: You can trigger a
new time limit by partial payment or settlement. Bankruptcy
starts the clock on the date of discharge, not ﬁling. Also, for
larger loans, these time limits may not apply.
Other information. Verify all other information such as
names, addresses, employment, date of birth, and so on.
Consistency with application. Remember, your loan underwriter will likely verify the data in your credit ﬁles with the liabilities and other information you list on your mortgage
application. Do they match up?

What to Do Next
Should you discover errors, omissions, or inconsistencies that push
down on your credit score, act immediately to correct them. If you
wait until a loan rep inquires about these derogatory entries, you could
lose your loan and the property you have agreed to buy. Some problems can disappear in a matter of days, but others may take months to
clear up.

Strengthen Your Credit Power

47

Contact the Credit Source and the Credit Repository Simultaneously Most credit advisors tell you to notify the credit repository,
point out the change you deserve, and formally (in writing) seek compliance with your request. Good advice except for one critical fact: Credit
repositories primarily report only the information your creditors give
them. Unless the repository has botched the data it’s been given (which
does happen), the repository must contact the misreporting creditor. If
the creditor does not respond within 30 days, the repository must remove the disputed item.
However, if the creditor says, “Sorry, no mistake on our part,” the
record remains as is. The problem’s back in your lap—but now 30 days
may have passed by. To head off this potential delay, contact the original
source of the information simultaneously and ask to have new, corrected
info sent to the repository. Upon request
some friendly creditors will even eliminate
Credit bureaus
derogatory remarks if you’re a customer the
creditor values.
only report the
On the other hand, if you’re dealing
data creditors
with a hostile or indifferent creditor, you
provide them.
could face a prolonged battle. In that case,
the loan underwriter will either waive the
“derog” upon suitable explanation from you; offer you a higher-cost, lessdesirable loan; or ﬂat out suspend commitment until you obtain the
creditor’s correction or release.
To get their mortgage closed on schedule, many borrowers have
had to pay disputed claims. Acting early prevents forced settlements on
eat-crow terms. So carefully review your credit reports now. Avoid getting into a borrowing situation where you’re offering last-minute pleas
under deadline conditions.

Your spouse or
partner’s low
credit score can
squelch your loan
approval.

Multiple Borrowers, Multiple Scores When
you and your spouse (or other coborrower) want to
buy and ﬁnance an investment property, all borrowers will need credit scores (or explanations) that
equal or exceed lender minimums. Without meeting this requirement, the low-score borrower must
withdraw as a coborrower. The lender will then
limit the loan amount to the qualifying capacity of
the high-score borrower.

48

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

You can work around this problem, though, when you buy an income property. You can bring in another person with strong credit (parent, partner, sibling, friend) to serve as cosignor or coborrower. Be
cautious, though. If you don’t make the loan payments on time, the
lender will report these late payments to the credit repositories (Experian, Equifax,Trans-Union). The derogs will show up in your ﬁle. But they
will also count against the credit record and credit score of your coborrower or cosignor.
One Borrower, Multiple Credit Scores Now, here’s a question you
need to consider. When your credit records show different credit scores,
which score will the lender choose to use if one of your scores falls
below the lender’s cutoff point? To a certain extent,
it will depend on the persuasive story you tell about
yourself and the reported discrepancies. In other inWhen they differ,
stances, the lender may average the scores or select
the lender may
the middle score. This method discounts your highaverage out your
est score, again underlining the importance of getcredit scores.
ting all low-scoring ﬁles updated and corrected
before you apply for your ﬁnancing.

Your Ex-Spouse Can Ruin Your Credit (and Other Tales of DoubleCounting)
Are you divorced, married, or planning to wed? Might you buy a property with a partner or signiﬁcant other? Then you’re going to face the
multiple-score, multiple-person problem of credit scoring and mortgage
approval.
The Ex-Spouse Dilemma If a competent lawyer handled your divorce, you should have cut up all joint credit cards and closed all joint accounts. If you and you ex-spouse owned a home
with a joint mortgage, one spouse should have
bought the other spouse out and reﬁnanced solely
Get your exin his or her own name. Without these precautions,
spouse’s name off
you’re still on the hook for these debts and they will
all of your
count against you when you apply for property ﬁnancing. If you haven’t yet eliminated this potential
accounts.
debt overload, work out something now.

Strengthen Your Credit Power

49

Your Ex-Spouse Can Ruin Your Credit Even worse than debt overload (for purposes of mortgage approval), your ex-spouse’s poor repayment habits on joint debts will show up to bruise your credit. These
same types of problems can also confront married couples who are separated (either legally or by informal agreement). When ending your personal lives together, abolish all joint credit accounts. Sometimes a lender
will permit you to explain away poor credit where the full responsibility
actually falls on your ex, but the lender will not overlook joint credit obligations that remain open. When the law imposes legal liability on you
for the debt, then as far as the lender’s concerned, it’s your debt. Or it’s
your credit line for as long as it remains open or unpaid. The lesson: Get
rid of all joint accounts that do not result from a current, trusting, continuing relationship.

Summing Up
For the top 20 to 30 percent of U.S. investors, credit scoring and automated underwriting greatly ease the pain of ﬁnancing a home or investment property. On the other hand, if you’re a borrower without
platinum-power credit (say a FICO score below 720), to improve your
credit score you must do something more than “pay your bills on time.”
You must align your credit behavior with FICO (or other credit scoring
systems). You (and your coborrowers) will achieve the lowest interest
rates, highest loan amounts, best terms, and least hassle only when you
play the credit game according to the rules laid down by these new sultans of mortgage credit. The higher you lift your credit score, the greater
your borrowing power.

C H A P T E R

4

How to Invest Using Little
(or None) of Your Own Cash
It’s true. You can proﬁt in real estate without much cash—especially
if you’ve strengthened your credit score. But even when you lack
platinum-power credit, you’ve still got a variety of little-or-no-cash-down
techniques that you can draw on to get you started as a real estate investor.

Why Low-Cash Deals Magnify Your Returns
Before we go into little-or-no-cash-down techniques, you need to see
why deals with small down payments can magnify your returns. Even if
you’re hoarding a pile of cash, you may still choose to hang onto your
money as you beneﬁt from the power of leverage.

The Power of Leverage
Leverage (other people’s money, commonly referred to as OPM) means
that you buy (or otherwise control) a property that’s worth perhaps 10
times as much as your original cash investment. To illustrate, suppose
you invest $10,000 in a $100,000 rental property. You ﬁnance this investment with a 30-year, $90,000 mortgage at 7.75 percent. After eight
years you will have paid down your mortgage balance to $81,585. With
4 percent a year appreciation for eight years, your property’s value will
50

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

51

have grown to $136,860. When you subtract
the balance of $81,585 from the property’s
appreciated value of $136,860, you’ll ﬁnd
appreciation can
that your original $10,000 investment has
give you 20
increased more than ﬁvefold to $55,275 of
percent returns.
equity. That result gives you an annual
growth in equity of around 24 percent (see
Table 4.1). Through the power of leverage,
you gained a return six times larger than the 4 percent rate of appreciation. Now you see why real estate investors call leverage the eighth
wonder of the world.
Sometimes leverage can even yield
much higher returns. And used foolishly—as
Investors call
you will soon see—leverage can magnify
leverage the eighth
your losses. But, over the long run, the great
majority of homebuyers and investors gain
wonder of the
tremendously from leverage. That’s why
world.
even wealthy real estate moguls like Donald
Trump and the late Harry Helmsley (past
Four percent

Table 4.1 With Leverage, Even Low Rates of Appreciation Yield High Returns
Today
Property purchase price
Original mortgage
Cash invested

$100,000
90,000
10,000

Eight Years Later
Market value at 4% appreciation
$136,860
Mortgage balance
81,585
Your equity
55,275
Growth in Your Equity
$10,000
|
0

$55,275
|
1

|
2

|
3

|
4

|
5

|
6

|
7

|
8 years

Annual growth rate of equity = 24%. Of course, proportionately increasing the rental income, the down payment, and the purchase price of this property would still yield a 24
percent rate of return. These ﬁgures assume that you ﬁnanced this property with a 7.75
percent mortgage amortized over 30 years.

52

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

owner of the Empire State Building) always relied heavily on borrowed
money to acquire and ﬁnance their property investments.

Leverage Can Also Magnify Your Annual Cash Returns
In addition to multiplying your proﬁts from appreciation, leverage magniﬁes your annual returns from cash ﬂows. Say you ﬁnd a seller who is
asking $100,000 for a rental property that yields a net operating income
(called NOI) of $10,000 a year. If you paid all cash for this property, you
would receive a return of 10 percent:
Example 1: $100,000 all-cash purchase
Income (NOI)
Cash investment
$10, 000
=
$100, 000

ROI (return on investment) =

= 10%

Now let’s say that you also want to compare your all-cash returns to
those you would receive using 75 percent and 90 percent ﬁnancing, respectively. Assume that you can borrow money at 6.5 percent and pay it
back over a term of 30 years. Here’s how leverage boosts your annual returns from cash ﬂow.
Example 2: $25,000 down payment; $75,000 ﬁnanced. Yearly
mortgage payments equal $6,607 (75   $7.34   12). Net cash ﬂow after
mortgage payments (called cash throw-off) equals $3,394 ($10,000 NOI
less $6,606).
ROI =

$3, 394
$25, 000

= 13.6%

Example 3: $10,000 down payment; $90,000 ﬁnanced. Yearly
mortgage payments equal $7,927 (90   $7.34   12). Net cash ﬂow after
mortgage payments (cash throw-off) equals $2,073 ($10,000 NOI less
$7,927).
ROI =

$2, 073
$10, 000

= 20.7%

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

53

With the ﬁgures in these examples, the highly leveraged ﬁnancing
(10 percent down payment) yields a cash-on-cash rate of return more than
double that of a cash purchase. In principle, the more
you borrow and the less cash you invest in a propEven wealthy
erty, the more you magnify your cash returns. Of
course, these examples merely illustrate the principle
investors use lowof leverage. The examples show how leverage may
down-payment
boost your returns. In practice, the properties you
techniques to
ﬁnd may produce numbers that look better or worse
increase their
than those returns you see here. Still, the fact that
nearly all wealthy investors ﬁnance their properties
leverage.
with large mortgages proves that leverage works.

Leverage Can Increase Risk
Savvy investors reap the beneﬁts of leverage. Foolish investors can lose
their shirts. What makes the difference? Financial discipline and cash reserves.
Financial Discipline If you can’t handle money responsibly, borrowing to the hilt can swamp you with debt. Never try to substitute “nothing
down” for ﬁnancial discipline. It doesn’t work that way. As I emphasize
in Chapter 1, before you invest in real estate, make sure you’re living
below your means. Learn to carefully manage your
everyday spending and borrowing.
Don’t let the real estate gurus suck you into beNever combine
lieving that high leverage alone can make you rich.
high leverage with
No! High leverage can help you get started. High
ﬁnancial
leverage can boost your returns. But without ﬁnancial discipline, high leverage can push you into forerecklessness.
closure or bankruptcy.
Cash Reserves Foolish investors always view the future through rosecolored glasses. These investors never anticipate an unexpected streak
of vacancies, a roof that needs to be replaced, or a spiked increase in
property taxes.
Over the long term, your rent collections and property appreciation will put hundreds of thousands of dollars into your bank accounts.
Over the short term, rent shortfalls and unbudgeted expenses can cause

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

54

unprepared investors to miss their mortgage payments and suffer foreclosure, or perhaps force them
into a quick sale at a loss (to an opportunistic inreserve of cash
vestor such as you?). To beneﬁt over the long run,
and credit.
you must successfully navigate through the storms
you’ll encounter along the way. When high seas are
trying to drown you, your cash reserves will prove to be your life jacket.
With these words of caution now in view, we next turn to the best
type of high-leverage ﬁnancing currently available.
Always keep a

Minimize Your Down Payment with Owner-Occupant Financing
By far, the easiest, safest, surest, and lowest cost way to borrow all (or
nearly all) of the money you need to invest in real estate centers upon
owner-occupied mortgage ﬁnancing. In other words, lenders give their
most favored interest rates and terms to investors and homebuyers who
live in their properties (for a minimum of 12 months). Numerous high
LTV (loan-to-value) owner-occupied loan programs are readily available
for single-family homes, condominiums, townhouses, and two- to fourunit apartment buildings.

Owner-Occupants Get the Lowest Down Payments
Many owner-occupied loan programs offer 3 percent, 5 percent, or even
0 percent down payment loans. With sterling credit, some lenders will
even loan you 125 percent of a property’s purchase price (if you agree
to live in the property). In contrast, if you do not plan to live in the property, many mortgage lenders (banks, mortgage bankers, savings institutions) often require investors to put 20 or 30 percent down. However,
since the late 1990s, some lenders have allowed investors to ﬁnance
their rental properties with only a 5 or 10 percent down payment. When
property markets soften, though, these liberal lenders will probably shut
their easy credit windows and force investors to put more cash into
their deals and dance through more hoops.
Besides offering low-down-payment ﬁnancing, lenders also qualify
owner-occupants with less exacting standards. Plus, interest rates for
owner-occupants can sit below the rate charged for investor loans. If

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

55

lenders are charging, say, 5.5 to 6.5 percent for loans to owner-occupants
with strong credit, the rate for most creditworthy investor loans will
probably range between 6.75 and 7.5 percent. As a beginning real estate
investor, you deﬁnitely should explore owner-occupied mortgage loans.

Owner-Occupied Buying Strategies
If you don’t currently own a home, you can begin building your wealth
in income properties very easily. Simply select a low-down-payment loan
program that appeals to you (the most popular ones are described later
in this chapter). Buy a one- to four-family property, live in it for (at least)
one year, then rent out your living unit and repeat
the process. Once you get your owner-occupied ﬁnancing, that loan can remain on a property even
To build wealth
after you move out and move a tenant in. Because
fast, use multiple
the second, third, or even fourth homes you buy and
owner-occupant
move into will still qualify for high-LTV ﬁnancing,
you can quickly accumulate several rental properloans.
ties as well as your own residence—all without
large cash investments.
Although you will be able to go through this process two, three,
maybe four times, you can’t execute it indeﬁnitely. At some point,
lenders will shut you off from owner-occupied ﬁnancing because they
will catch on to your game plan. Nevertheless, buying houses (or 2–4
unit apartment buildings) and holding on to them as you successively
move in and move out makes a great way to accumulate your ﬁrst several investment properties.

Current Homeowners, Too, Can Use This Method
You may already
own an
investment
property—your
own home.

Even if you already own a home, you too should
deﬁnitely weigh the advantages of using owneroccupied ﬁnancing to acquire your next several
properties. Here’s how: Locate a property (condominium, house, 2–4 unit apartment building) that
you can buy and move into. Find a good tenant for
your current home. Complete the owner-occupied
ﬁnancing on your new property and move into it. If

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

56

you really like your current home, at the end of one year, rent out your
recently acquired investment property and move back into your former
residence. Or alternatively, ﬁnd another “home” to buy and again ﬁnance
this property with an owner-occupied mortgage.

Why One Year?
To qualify for owner-occupied ﬁnancing you must tell the lender that
you intend to live in the property for at least a year. Intent, though, does
not mean guarantee. You can (for good reason, or no reason) change
your mind. The lender will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to prove that you falsely stated
your intent at the time you applied for the loan.
Nevertheless, to succeed in real estate over the short and long term,
you must establish, maintain, and nurture your credibility with lenders—
and everyone else. Always build your deal making on a foundation of
trust. When you sidestep agreements, slip through loopholes, make false
promises, or connive in any similar slights, you will
water down your credibility. Unless you really do enNever ﬁb to a
counter an unexpected turn of events, honor a
lender about
lender’s occupancy requirement. When you establish and nurture your credit and credibility, you will
owner-occupancy.
attract money as a magnet attracts iron ﬁlings.

Where Can You Find Low-Down-Payment, High-LTV, Owner-Occupied
Mortgages?
Everywhere! Look through the yellow section of your telephone book
under “mortgages.” Then start calling banks, savings institutions, mortgage bankers, mortgage brokers, and credit unions. Also, many mortgage
lenders advertise in local daily newspapers.1 Check, too, with your state,
county, or city departments of housing ﬁnance. Homebuilders and Realtors also will know various types of low- or nothing-down home ﬁnance
programs. An hour or two on the telephone will turn up dozens of possibilities.

1. For more extensive tips and insights on mortgage lending, see my book, The 106 Mortgage Secrets that All Borrowers Must Learn—But Lenders Don’t Tell (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003).

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

You can ﬁnd
dozens of low- or

57

Although space here doesn’t permit a full discussion of all low- or no-down-payment possibilities, here are a variety of widely available programs.

no-down-payment
mortgages.

Don’t Overlook FHA

FHA does not
restrict its loans to
low- or moderateincome
individuals.

The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) offers
the most well-known low-down-payment home ﬁnance plans. Yet, somewhat perversely, many homebuyers believe that FHA limits its loans to people
who earn low or moderate incomes. For instance,
one of Florida’s largest newspapers continues to describe FHA as a program for “low-income homebuyers.” Not true. No matter how much you earn, FHA
may provide the key to your home ﬁnancing.

FHA 203(b)
When Realtors and mortgage lenders talk about an FHA loan, they are
typically referring to the FHA 203(b) mortgage. With close to 1 million
new FHA 203(b) loans made last year alone, this program is the largest
single low-down-payment loan available throughout the United States.
You can get into this type of FHA mortgage for just 3 or 5 percent
out-of-pocket cash—sometimes a little more, sometimes less. On an
$85,000 property you would pay around $3,250. To ﬁnance a $125,000
property you’d pay approximately $6,000, and a property priced at
$175,000 would require cash of around $8,250.

How Much Will FHA Finance?
FHA sets loan limits for each locale around the country. In high-priced
cities such as Los Angeles, San Diego, Washington, D.C., and Boston, the
FHA maximum loan currently tops out (for single-family houses, condos, and townhomes) at $290,319. In the lowest priced areas of the
country, the maximum FHA home loan comes in at $160,176. Because
FHA limits vary, consult with a Realtor or mortgage loan advisor in the

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

58

area where you would like to own. Then compare these limits to property prices to see if FHA 203(b) can work for you. (Note: Much higher
FHA limits apply in Hawaii. You can also check the maximum loan
amounts for any county in the country at HUD.gov.)

Buy Rental Properties
As another choice, buy a duplex, triplex, or fourplex. As long as you live
in one of the units, you still get a low down payment. Here are some examples of maximum FHA loan ﬁgures for 2–4 unit properties:

Two units
Three units
Four units

To get on the fast
track to investing,
buy a 2–4 unit
building.

Lower Cost Areas

Highest Cost Areas

$205,032
247,824
307,992

$371,621
449,181
558,236

If you buy a 2–4 unit property, you won’t have to
qualify for the loan using just your monthly earnings. The rents that you collect from the property
also will count. Because my ﬁrst investment property was a ﬁve-unit apartment house, I strongly favor
this approach to getting started.

Other FHA Advantages
Besides offering a low down payment, FHA borrowers enjoy many other
advantages:
1. You can roll many of your closing expenses and mortgage insurance premiums into your loan. This cuts the out-of-pocket
cash you’ll need at closing.
2. You may choose from either ﬁxed-rate or adjustable-rate FHA
plans. (FHA adjustable-rate mortgages give you lower annual
caps and lower lifetime caps than most other ARM programs.)
3. FHA authorizes banks and other lenders to use higher qualifying ratios and easier underwriting guidelines (see Chapter 5).

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

59

After you’ve shaped up your ﬁnances, FHA will do all it can to
approve your loan.
4. If interest rates drop (and as long as you have a clean mortgage payment record for the previous 12 months), you can
“streamline” reﬁnance your FHA loan at lower interest rates
without a new property appraisal and without having to requalify.
5. If you can persuade your parents or other close relatives to
“gift” you the down payment, you won’t need to come up with
any closing-table cash from your own pocket. (Undoubtedly,
many “gifted” down payments are really loans in disguise.)
6. Unlike most nongovernment loans, FHA mortgages are assumable. Someone who later agrees to buy your home need not
apply for a new mortgage. When mortgage interest rates are
high, an assumable low-rate FHA mortgage will give your
home a great selling advantage.

The Verdict on FHA 203(b)
If you’re a cash-short investor who wants to begin acquiring properties,
deﬁnitely consider the FHA 203(b) ﬁnance plan. The
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban DevelopDon’t choose your
ment or HUD (the parent of FHA) is pushing for favorable changes in the 203(b) program. Lower
ﬁnancing until
costs, higher limits, and faster closings are three imyou’ve at least
portant goals. Both the HUD Secretary and Presitalked to an FHA
dent Bush are trying to make FHA more attractive to
a wider number of Americans and legal immigrants.
loan specialist.

Discover FHA’s Best Kept Secret: The 203(k) Program
Like many renters, Quentlin Henderson of Orlando, Florida, hoped to invest in real estate some day. Yet, with little savings, Quentlin thought he
wouldn’t realize his hopes for at least three to four years. He never
dreamed that within six months he would actually own a completely
renovated, three-bedroom, two-bath house of 2,288 square feet—more

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

60

than two and a half times as large as his previous 900-square-foot apartment.
How did Quentlin manage this feat? He discovered the little
known, but increasingly available, FHA 203(k) mortgage loan program.
FHA 203(k) allows owner-occupant investors to acquire and improve a
rundown property with a low- or no-down-payment loan. “The house
needed a new roof, new paint, new carpeting; and a bad pet odor needed
to be removed,” says Quentlin. “There was no way I could have paid for
the house plus the repairs at the same time. And there was no way I
could have otherwise afforded a house this size.”

Locate an FHA 203(k) Specialist
To use a 203(k) plan, ﬁrst locate a mortgage loan advisor who understands the current FHA 203(k) purchase and improvement process. In
the past, FHA often stuck borrowers in red tape for months without end.
But now with recent FHA streamlining and special software, Robert
Arrowwood of California Financial Corporation reports that up-to-date,
direct endorsement (DE) ﬁrms like his can “close 203(k) loans in four to
six weeks instead of four to six months.” (HUD lists 203(k) specialists on
its website at HUD.gov.)

Search for Good Value
After you’ve located 203(k) advisors who know what they’re doing, next
search for a property that offers good value for the money. In Quentlin
Henderson’s case, his Realtor found him a bargainpriced, six-year-old house that was in a sorry state
The 203(k)
because its former owners had abandoned it as a reprogram helps
sult of foreclosure. “The good news for people who
buy such houses,” says Bob Osterman of FHA’s Oryou build instant
lando, Florida ofﬁce,“is that purchase prices are genequity.
erally low so that after repairs are made, the home’s
new value often produces instant equity.”
Not surprisingly, the term “instant equity” was also used by John
Evianiak, a 203(k) investor in Baltimore. “Not only can you buy a house
and ﬁx it the way you like,” John says,“but you can buy a property for

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

61

much below its market value, put some money into it, and create instant
equity. There were a lot of other houses we checked out. But we were
going by the proﬁt margin.”

Inspect, Design, Appraise
Once you locate a property that you ﬁgure can be bought and rehabbed
proﬁtably, you next must come to terms with the owners on price and
other conditions of sale. With agreement in hand, the house (or condo or
2–4 unit apartment) is then inspected, a formal plan of repair and renovation is designed, and the home is appraised according to its value after
your improvements have been completed. The amount of your loan is
based upon your purchase price plus your rehab expenses up to around
100 percent of the property’s renovated value.

Eligible Properties and Improvements
As long as you plan to pay more than $5,000 in rehab expenses, you can
use a 203(k) mortgage to acquire and improve nearly any one- to fourunit property. In terms of speciﬁc repairs and renovations, the 203(k)
mortgage permits an almost endless list of possibilities. Here are some
examples:
◆ Install skylights, ﬁreplaces, energy-efﬁcient items, or new appli-

ances (stove, refrigerator, washer, dryer, trash compactor, dishwasher).
◆ Finish off an attic or basement.
◆ Eliminate pollution or safety hazards (lead paint, asbestos, underground storage tanks).
◆ Add living units such as an accessory apartment or two.
◆ Recondition or replace plumbing, roof, or HVAC systems.
◆ Improve aesthetic appeal (paint, carpet, tile, exterior siding).
◆ Install or replace a well or septic system.
◆ Landscape and fence the yard.
As you can see, the FHA 203(k) program can really help you increase the value of a property—using little or none of your own cash.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

62

Too Many Vets Pass Up VA Loans
If you’re a veteran with eligible active military service, or if you have
served at least six years in the reserves, the Department of Veterans Affairs holds your ticket to nothing-down investing. The VA mortgage is
truly one of the best beneﬁts offered to those who have worn our country’s uniform. Last year alone, a record 600,000 veterans took advantage
of this loan program. Here are several of the great beneﬁts you’ll get with
a VA mortgage.
◆ No

down payment. With a VA loan you can ﬁnance up to
$240,000 without putting any money down. If you want to buy a
higher-priced property, you need only come up with 25 percent of
the amount over $240,000. For instance, if the property you want
to buy is priced at $300,000, you’ll need a down payment of
$15,000 (0.25   $60,000)—or just 5 percent of the purchase
price.
◆ Liberal qualifying. Similar to FHA,VA loans offer liberal qualifying guidelines. Many (but not all) VA lenders will forgive properly explained credit blemishes. The VA loan also permits higher
qualifying ratios. I’ve seen veterans with good compensating factors close loans with a 0.48 total debt ratio. (See Chapter 8.)
◆ Closing costs paid. Often homebuilders and cooperative sellers will pay all of the veteran’s settlement expenses. In fact,
builders sometimes advertise that veterans can buy homes in
their developments for just $1 total move-in costs.
◆ 2–4 unit properties. As with FHA loans, VA will ﬁnance a single-family house or an owner-occupied 2–4 unit property. However, unlike FHA,VA does not raise its lending limits for duplexes,
triplexes, and quads.
◆ Assumable. Like FHA, a non-vet buyer may assume your VA
mortgage when you sell your home. Also like FHA, if interest
rates fall you can streamline a no-appraisal, no-qualifying reﬁnance.
◆ No mortgage insurance. But unlike FHA, when you use a VA
loan, you won’t have to buy mortgage insurance. You will have to
pay a one-time “funding fee” ranging between 1.5 to 2.75 percent
of the amount you borrow. If you don’t want to pay this fee in cash
at closing, you can tell the lender to add it to your mortgage loan
balance.

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

63

As with some other types of mortgages, VA
loans may require piles of paperwork. You will need
to comply with rules that look into job history, propFHA/VA loan rep
erty condition, property value (called a CRV), and
specializes in
seller prepaids. That’s why you should work with a
mortgage loan advisor who is skilled and experithese types of
enced in the day-to-day job of getting VA loans aploans.
proved. “The devil is in the details,” says loan
consultant Abe Padoka. Make sure you work with
professionals who know the ins and outs of the VA application and approval process.
Be sure your

Even Fannie and Freddie Accept Little- or Nothing-Down Loans
Conventional
lenders
(nongovernment
loans) now offer
multiple types of
low-downpayment loans.

In the mid 1990s, both Freddie Mac (see www.
homesteps.com) and Fannie Mae (www.fanniemae.
com) have committed to making far more little- or
nothing-down loan programs available. Since then, in
addition to their standard 5 percent down loan product, Fannie and Freddie have pioneered community
homebuyer programs, 3 percent down loans, and now
even 103 percent LTV loans—meaning qualiﬁed borrowers can go through closing with almost no cash
out of their own pocket. For a full view of Fannie/
Freddie programs, visit these companies’ websites.

Tougher Credit Standards and Lower-Cost Private Mortgage Insurers
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac low-down-payment loans do apply tougher
credit standards than either FHA or VA, but their loan limits reach substantially higher. Also, borrowers whose credit scores top 680 (possibly
620) will probably pay less for private mortgage insurance with these
loan programs than they would with FHA.
On the other hand, borrowers with FICO scores of less than 620
may ﬁnd that FHA’s mortgage insurance premiums (MIP) now fall below
the premiums of the private insurers who guarantee Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac’s low-down-payment mortgages (LTVs greater than 80

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

64

percent). That’s because the private mortgage insurers recently kicked
up their costs to give marginal borrowers a real wallop—an increase of
nearly $200 per month on a $200,000 mortgage.

Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Loan Limits
Unlike FHA loans, the maximum amount you can borrow under Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae programs does not vary by area of the country—except for Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the Virgin Islands, where
loan limits are 50 percent higher than the continental United States.
Generally, Freddie and Fannie loan limits are high enough to ﬁnance
good properties in decent neighborhoods. Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae programs will lend up to the following amounts (adjusted upward
each year):
Maximum Loan Limits (Continental United States)
Type of Residence

Loan Limits

One-family
Two-family
Three-family
Four-family

$333,700
427,150
516,300
641,650

As you can see, a Fannie or Freddie low-down-payment loan can get
you a property valued in excess of $650,000. Remember, too, all you
need to do is move into the property for a minimum of 12 months. What
a great way to buy a fourplex—yet still beneﬁt with high leverage and
the lowest mortgage interest rates available.

Summing Up
Whether you currently rent or own, if you’re cash-short, I urge you to seriously consider the advantages of ﬁnancing your next investment property with a low- or no-down-payment owner-occupied loan. In fact, even
if the amount of your bank balance climbs up to six ﬁgures or more, remember the great (potential) beneﬁts of high leverage. Whatever your ﬁ-

How to Invest Using Little (or None) of Your Own Cash

65

nancial situation, before you invest, carefully weigh the advantages of
owner-occupied ﬁnancing.
But if you can’t or don’t want to go for this type of easy ﬁnancing,
take heart. You’ve still got many other low- or no-cash possibilities. For
those techniques, we now turn to Chapter 5.

C H A P T E R

5

Forget the Banks, Seek Out
Seller Financing

Robert Bruss, the nationally syndicated columnist, real estate attorney,
and investor, was recently asked,“Where’s the best place to get a mortgage? At a bank, savings and loan, or credit union?” He answered,“None
of these is the best. The best source of ﬁnancing is the seller.” If you can
persuade the sellers to help with your ﬁnancing, you’ll probably get
many of the following beneﬁts:
1. Little (or nothing) down. Although some sellers do insist
on a 20 or 30 percent down payment, most owners who offer
OWC (owner-will-carry) ﬁnancing will accept 10 percent
down (or less).
2. Lower credit standards. Although banks have made qualifying easier, they’re still tougher than most sellers.
3. No qualifying income. As we discuss in Chapter 8, many
sellers expect you to pay their monthly payments from the income the property produces rather than use their own earnings. As long as your rent collections look like they’re enough
to cover all of your expenses, the seller won’t usually ask for
your W-2s or income tax returns (as will a bank).
4. Flexibility. Price, interest rate, monthly payments, and other
terms are set by mutual agreement. You and the sellers can
put together a ﬁnancing package in any way that works for
both of you.
66

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

67

5. Lower closing costs. Sellers seldom require points, origination fees, and loan application costs. Unlike lending institutions, sellers don’t have to cover ofﬁce overhead.
6. Less paperwork. Although sellers may ask for your credit
scores, they won’t require a stack of forms, documents, and
veriﬁcations.
7. Quicker sale. Seller ﬁnancing can help sellers get their property sold more quickly. Plus, for properties that require extensive repairs or renovations, seller ﬁnancing can make the
difference between a sale and no sale.
The types of seller-assisted ﬁnancing that you might use to buy a
property are as varied as your imagination. But be aware, not all owners
who will accept (OWC) ﬁnancing advertise that
fact. Indeed, Robert Bruss says, “I’ve bought many
Even sellers who
properties with seller ﬁnancing. But I can’t recall a
do not advertise
single one that was advertised ‘seller ﬁnancing.’ Until
they saw my offer, none of the sellers had informed
OWC will often
their agent that they would help ﬁnance the sale.”
accept it.
Although many sellers do advertise, Bruss is
right. Regardless of whether sellers state their intention to carry back ﬁnancing, keep the possibility in mind. You won’t
know for sure until you’ve written up an offer.
For numerous examples of seller-assisted ﬁnancing that I’ve
reprinted from the pages of recent newspapers, see Box 5.1. Look
through your local papers. More than likely you’ll ﬁnd many similar
types of ads. And even if you don’t, never fear to make seller ﬁnancing a
part of your offer.

Sellers Can Nearly Always Beat the Banks at Their Own Game, But
You Must Do More than Ask
Here are the differences: Mortgage lenders operate by bureaucratic
rules. Sellers are free to listen to any deal you suggest that provides them
worthwhile beneﬁts. Lenders may require qualiﬁcations, paperwork,
documents, and veriﬁcations piled higher and deeper. Sellers can agree
to as few documents and qualifying standards as reasonable in a speciﬁc
situation. Lenders pay huge costs for fancy buildings, ofﬁce overhead,

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

68

Lease With Option to
Buy $450/mo. 1 yearrent toward down payment on purchase price
of $56,000.
315 DOVER—MUST
SEE. Completely Remodeled Brick bungalow,
foyer, 2  BR, large
kitchen and living room,
oak cabinets, dishwasher, range, recessed
lighting, gas frplc, part.
Fin. LL, big yard w/privacy fence. CALL 5555555 Broker
$6950 DOWN on this 3
Bdrm ranch with ceiling
fans, fncd yrd. Just redone in pale grays with
new carpet, paint, etc.
Paid off in full in 25 yrs!
$695.09 per mo.
OWNER CONTRACT!
$84,950. 9.75% APR.
NO BALLOON! 5555555. R.E. Lic./owner.
NO QUALIFY
5  Bdrm, 4 Ba. $295K.
Owner Financing, only
48K dn. 4118 Catalina
Pl. Call 555-5555.
$5000 DOWN, $1695
mo. Poway, 2yr new, 4br.
3ba, pool, 3car gar,
$249,500. 1 or 2 year
lse. 555-5555
1Level Beauty $173,500
Contract Terms/Lease
Option Wonderful 1
level 2 bdrm plus
den/3rd BR, 2BA, A/C, island kitchen, masonry
frplc, security, 2 car
garage, fncd. More! Westside Realty Co. 555-5555

Box 5.1

OWNER MAY
CARRY 2ND!!
Near schools, best area,
3 BR. Make Offer! Only
$140,000 Century 21
555-5555
LEASE/PURCHASE. You
can own your home &
move now through a
ﬂexible lease/purchase
w/little down. Lovely 3
BR, 2 BA Cape Cod
w/bsmt on a beautiful,
prvt, wooded ac lot.
Convenient location.
Hurry! Low $90s. Buddy
Boone 555-5555. Remax
555-5555
OWNER FINANCE
2  acre estate. Large
brick home with full
bsmt, pool, workshop,
and more—$164,900.
Low down payment. V.
Purser 555-5555
METRO BROKERS 5555555
DOUGLASVILLE
NEW HOMES
LEASE PURCHASE
No credit check! $120s.
$1300 /mo. 5% down
moves you in. 555-5555
C21 GM
DOUGLASVILLE
OWNER FINANCE
3BR 2BA, large lot, 2 car
garage, hardwood ﬂrs,
new carpet, ﬁreplace,
screened porch. $122K.
$4000 down. $950 mo.
ReMax West, 555-5555
TOWN LAKE Lease Purchase/Owner Finance
4BR/2BA on basement,
brick front, nice neigh-

borhood, fenced yard.
$199,900. 555-5555
www.easyhousebuy.com
A1A R.E. Solutions
TOWN LAKE Nearly
new. LR, DR, fam rm, 2stry brick trad. 0 down
pay as low as $600 Pl.
Poss. Trade. All credit
considered. R. Stone.
Re/Max Realty Group
555-5555.
OCOEE AREA—OWNER
FINANCE! NO BANK
QUALIFY! ONLY $8K/dn.
Huge 4/4.5/3, plus Library, big POOL/SPA.
3,700 htd sq ft.
$2850/mo. Across from
big lake. Call 555-5555
NORTH MIAMI Fourplex all 1/1, $139K 25%
down. Owner ﬁnance.
No brkrs. 555-5555 after
4 p.m.
POWDER SPRINGS
No Credit Check
RENT TO OWN 4 homes
avail. Immediately.
$1100-$1500/mo. Down
payment neg. $140’s.
555-5555 C-21 GM

down for deposit or
closing costs. Below appraisal 555-5555
SoBch 17 Apts Ocean
Dr. Owner Finance—
10% down. Rudy,The
Singing Rltr. BestInv. RE
555-5555
JONESBORO—Open
hours Sat & Sun. 2–5
Lease Option. 1–3 yr.
Lse. 3BR/2BA ranch.
Owner Fin. $119K. 5555555
JONESBORO Owner Finance/Lease Purchase.
Lovely 3BR brick ranch,
$94,900. $795/mo.
Owner. 555-5555 anytime
JONESBORO SALE OR
LEASE/PURCH. Reno.
Brk. Ranch, 3BR, 2BA,
LR, DR, carport.
$118,900 $985. 5555555. By Owner
2 BR, 1 BA—All Brick!
1100sqft. $109,900. Motivated owner will ﬁnance, make offer.
555-5555

TOWN CENTER Mall
area. Owner ﬁnancing.
3000 s.f. traditional.
$199,900. By Owner.
www.ownerﬁnancing.tk

Gainesville Mobile
Home Park 100 Pad
w/6 extra acres. Owner
ﬁnance. 1.2 Million. 5555555.

OWNER FINANCING 2
BR, Sun Rm, corner lot,
renovated. Greenleaf.
$6,500 down $470 mo.
555-5555

WINTER PARK—RENT
TO OWN. 4/2/2 car gar,
new & loaded! $4495
moves you in,
$1250/mo. Free 24hr
msg 555-5555

SOUTHWEST
ORANGE—No money

A Sampling of Ads with Seller-Assisted Financing

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

OWC offers you
ﬂexibility and
often lower costs.

69

loan rep commissions, and executive perks. Sellers
incur none of these expenses. In addition to interest, lenders may charge you thousands of dollars in
origination fees, closing costs, and mortgage insurance. Sellers expect payment only for interest and
maybe a few out-of-pocket costs.

How to Get the Sellers Interested
If you simply pop the question to sellers out of the blue and ask them to
carry back ﬁnancing, many will answer with a quick no. So, always put
your proposal in writing as part of your offer to buy the property. Don’t
necessarily expect oral concessions on this issue right away. (Prior to
writing an offer, I do frequently pose feeler questions such as,“Have you given any thought to offerUse OWC feeler
ing ﬁnancing with the property?”) Most important,
before you write an offer, learn the seller’s needs
questions.
and selling motives:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Do they want or need a quick sale?
Do they seriously need cash?
Would a safe 6 to 8 percent return seem attractive to them?
If the property is currently owned by investors, what kind of
capital gains tax liability will these sellers incur from an allcash sale? Would an IRS-approved installment sale save the
sellers taxes?
5. What do the sellers plan to do with the proceeds of sale?
6. What other pressures of time, money, family, or work bear on
the sale?
These questions merely suggest lines of inquiry. Basically, you should
tactfully learn as much about the sellers as you can. Then draft your written offer to play into their most pressing needs.
Explain point-by-point how your offer alleviates their principal
concerns without giving rise to new ones. Are you a credible buyer?
Does the proposal create too much risk? A skilled Realtor may be able to
help you achieve this result. Remember, a confused mind always says no.
Eliminate seller doubts with clear and compelling reasons.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

70

What Type of Seller Financing?
Although we often speak of “seller ﬁnancing,” the term really doesn’t
refer to just a single technique. In fact, as you gain experience, you’ll ﬁnd
that the wide ﬂexibility of seller-ﬁnance techniques gives OWC considerable advantage over bank ﬁnancing. Here are several of the most popular ways that sellers can cooperate and participate in the ﬁnancing
arrangement:
◆ Mortgage or trust deed
◆ Contract-for-deed
◆ Lease option
◆ Master lease

◆ Lease purchase
◆ Mortgage assumption
◆ “Subject to” purchase
◆ Wraparound

Mortgage (Trust Deed)
Generally speaking, when you ﬁnance your property with a bank, the
bank will loan you money (which is immediately turned over to the sellers), and you will sign a mortgage (or depending on the state where you
are buying property, the lender may use a deed of trust). By signing this
document, you pledge the property as security for your loan. If you fail
to make your payments, the lender can follow a legal procedure to auction off the property at a public foreclosure (trustee) sale.

Seller Mortgages (Trust Deeds)
Essentially, seller mortgages work the same as bank mortgages—except
that no money (aside from your down payment, if any) changes hands.
Instead, the sellers deed you their property in exchange for your pledge
to pay the sellers over time through periodic installments (usually
monthly payments).
But like a bank, if you don’t pay as agreed, the sellers can ﬁle a foreclosure lawsuit against you. If the sellers prove that you’ve failed to pay
(and you offer no persuasive legal defenses), your property will be sold
to the highest bidder at a public auction. You (and quite likely the sellers) will lose money. As a rule, foreclosure sales seldom bring in enough
money to make everyone whole.

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

Persuade the
sellers with
credibility and
beneﬁts.

71

Because OWC sellers can lose money if you
don’t pay, most property owners initially prefer to
cash out at the time of sale.They simply don’t want to
take the risk that you will default. Therefore, especially in low-down (or nothing-down) deals, you must
persuade the sellers using two separate reasons:

Emphasize Your Credibility and Reliability
Even though few sellers will put your credit and ﬁnances under a magnifying glass (as will a bank), they still want you to assure them that they
can count on you to make your payments on time, every time. You must
persuade sellers of your credibility and reliability.
To achieve this goal, marshal as much convincing evidence as you
can. Emphasize your consistency, character, and when favorable, your
credit scores (see Chapter 3). In addition, if you’ve built up a signiﬁcant
net worth, accumulated cash reserves, or maybe you earn a good income
from a secure job, play up any or all of these positives.
Stress Seller Beneﬁts To make OWC ﬁnancing attractive to the sellers, also stress the beneﬁts that the sellers will receive. I have found
many sellers who fear to carry back OWC ﬁnancing because they don’t
want the worries. But after I persuade them of my credibility and the
advantages they can reap, more often than not, they accept my offer.
What do the sellers get out of the deal? As noted earlier, I have
found that sellers are willing to carry back ﬁnancing for some combination of these six reasons:
1. No bank ﬁnancing available. A property may not qualify
for bank ﬁnancing. The property might suffer from poor condition; be located in a less-desirable neighborhood; or stand
functionally out-of-date (rooming house, apartment units with
shared bathrooms, irregular ﬂoor plan). Also, many lending institutions won’t write mortgages on condominiums or townhouses where more than 30 or 40 percent of the units in the
complex are occupied by renters instead of owners.
2. Quick sale. One of the best ways for an owner to sell a property quickly is to accept easy terms of ﬁnancing. Do the sellers
want to move on with their lives? Then follow the adage, “a
buyer at hand is worth two ‘maybes’ six months into the future.” Emphasize the here and now.

72

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

3. Higher price. Property owners who accept easy ﬁnancing
can often sell at a higher price than they otherwise could expect to receive.
4. High interest on savings. Sellers who plan to deposit the
cash they receive from a sale in certiﬁcates of deposit or
money market accounts can get a higher return on their
money by ﬁnancing a buyer’s purchase of their property. A 6
to 8 percent return from a real estate installment sale certainly
beats a 2 to 5 percent return from a certiﬁcate of deposit.
5. Low closing costs. With OWC ﬁnancing, sellers (and buyers)
pay far less in closing costs. You avoid much of the expense
that a mortgage lender would charge.
6. Tax savings. When the seller is an investor, an installment
sale of a property produces a smaller income tax bite than
does a cash sale. Installment sales permit sellers to spread
their taxes on depreciation recapture and capital gains over
the entire term of the mortgage.
As we look to the future, I expect the aging of the U.S. population
will bring about more seller-ﬁnanced transactions. Why? Because savings
accounts offer too little interest. Stocks offer too much perceived risk.
As a result, increasing numbers of seniors will prefer the larger returns
and small risks of seller ﬁnancing.

Who Handles the Legal Work?
In a few states, chieﬂy in the northeast, lawyers get themselves involved
in most property purchases—with or without seller ﬁnancing. In the
great majority of states, most sellers and buyers set
up an escrow account with a title insurance comTypically, a title
pany. Experienced personnel at the title company
company can
then take care of all the paperwork. I have used this
approach many times and have never run into any
handle the OWC
difﬁculties because of it.
paperwork.
Nevertheless, as a beginning investor, you may
want to discuss the details of your deal with a
knowledgeable and trustworthy real estate attorney. True, I sometimes
ﬁnd that lawyers create more problems and expenses than they’re

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

73

worth. And I know many real estate investors who feel the same way.
Still, when necessary, we do use them.1

Try a Contract-for-Deed
Among the most famous lines in American silent ﬁlm history (in The Perils of Pauline) is Oil Can Harry’s repeated warnings to Pauline,“If you
don’t give me the deed to your ranch, I’m going to tie you to the railroad
tracks.” Oil Can Harry knew that if Pauline signed over the deed to her
ranch, that deed would transfer the property’s title
to Harry. Although Oil Can Harry’s no-money-down
Some types of
approach to property ownership was somewhat unorthodox (not to mention illegal), typically, whenOWC delay the
ever someone buys real estate, they receive a deed
transfer of deed.
at the time of purchase. With the deed comes ownership (albeit often subject to a mortgage).
In some purchases, though, buyers don’t receive a deed at the time of
sale. Instead, they buy a property on the installment plan. In this type of
purchase, buyers usually pay the sellers a small down payment and promise to continue paying monthly installments. In return, the sellers give the
buyers possession. But unlike with a mortgage, the sellers don’t deliver the
deed at “closing.” Rather, they contractually promise to deliver a deed to
the buyers only after they have completed their scheduled payments.
This type of OWC agreement is known by various names such as
contract-for-deed, installment sale, or land contract. For beginning investors, a land contract can be an excellent way to buy property. I know
from experience.

Why Sellers Are Willing
When I turned age 21, I wanted to acquire real estate as quickly as possible. At the time I was an undergraduate college student. I had little cash,
1. For more on taking advice from lawyers, real estate agents, friends, and family, see my book, The
106 Common Mistakes Homebuyers Make—And How to Avoid Them, 3rd ed. (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 2002), pp. 216–220.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

74

no full-time job, and no signiﬁcant credit record. My immediate chances
for getting a bank to write a mortgage for me were zero. But this fact
didn’t deter me. I searched for owners who would sell their properties
to me on an installment contract. By the time I completed my Ph.D., I
had bought around 30 houses and small apartment units. The cash ﬂow
from these properties paid many of my college expenses (and yes, for my
Cessna and Jaguar XK-E2).
My sellers accepted this type of OWC ﬁnancing for most (or all) of
the reasons I listed. But the contract-for-deed then offered sellers one
more important advantage. If I failed to make my monthly payments, the
sellers could repossess the ﬁnanced property—almost as easily as a bank
can repossess a car.
Today, though, many states have made it tougher for sellers to repossess properties. Now, courts sometimes force contract-for-deed sellers to ﬁle a foreclosure lawsuit. Buyers gain more protection, but fewer
sellers are willing to put up with this extra hassle. So (in the tough
states), the land contract has lost much of its popularity to the lease option (discussed later).

Follow These Guidelines
When you and the property you buy meet the qualifying standards of a
lending institution, great. You can weigh the relative costs and beneﬁts
of each type of ﬁnancing. On the other hand, if bank ﬁnancing is not
available, always try to negotiate a contract-for-deed (or seller-held mortgage). Buying from a seller on the installment plan beats not investing at
all. If you’re a cash-short buyer, you can win with this strategy in the following way: Buy a rundown property with an installment contract. Then
create value through improvements. Next, reﬁnance based on the now
higher value of the property and pay off the sellers and put title in your
own name.
If you do ﬁnance a property with a contract-for-deed (or other type
of OWC), follow these guidelines:
1. Buy the property, not the ﬁnancing. Don’t let easy credit
draw you into the purchase of an overpriced property. When
2. When I was younger, I did waste too much money on expensive toys—a mistake I no longer make.

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

75

circumstances warrant, you might in good judgment pay a
price slightly higher than market value. But you would not
pay $8,000 for any old car from Easy Ed’s “buy here, pay here”
used car lot just because Easy Ed will sell it to you with nothing down and low monthly payments. This same principle applies to investment properties. Beware of the real estate
gurus who urge you to entice the seller with the proposition,
“You name the price; I’ll name the terms.” Verify value
through an appraisal or other professional opinion. Don’t
agree to overpay.
2. Beware of hidden defects. A property that seems priced
right might suffer hidden defects. Take care to obtain experienced and knowledgeable estimates for any repairs or renovations that you plan. Never “ballpark” or casually ﬁgure the
costs necessary to bring a property up to the condition you
want it. Get professional property inspections and cost estimates before you invest.
3. Contract terms are governed by law. A contract-for-deed
places you and the seller in a relationship that is governed not
only by the contract language, but also by state laws and court
decisions. Under an installment sale, your rights and responsibilities differ from those you acquire when you ﬁnance a
property with a mortgage or trust deed.
Before you sign an installment-sale agreement,
consult a real estate attorney who can tell you the
Don’t let a lawyer
details of land contract law in your state. Be aware.
Many lawyers warn against buying a property on
derail you without
the installment plan because such contracts pose
ﬁrst considering
more risk than a mortgage agreement. These
beneﬁts as well as
lawyers look at risks without considering beneﬁts
and opportunities. (Using similar logic, such lawyers
risks.
would advise against marriage because you might
suffer the pain of divorce.)
Get a lawyer who understands both rewards and risks. Then negotiate a contract-for-deed that can work for you and the sellers. Over the
years, millions of Americans (especially low-to-moderate-income Americans) have successfully bought houses and small rental properties on
the land contract installment plan. I was one of them.

76

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

Assume a Low-Interest-Rate Mortgage
Although technically not a form of seller ﬁnancing per se, some sellers
do offer you the opportunity to take over their current mortgage. This
process is called “assuming the sellers’ ﬁnancing.” Seller assumables may
offer distinct advantages over new ﬁnancing:
◆ Lower interest rate
◆ Easier qualifying
◆ Low closing costs
◆ Little or nothing down

Return to the Past with an Assumable Loan
When market interest rates climb back up, you don’t have to pay those
higher rates. Instead, shop for a property with a low-interest-rate assumable loan. Say it’s three years into the future and you want to buy a
property. But market interest rates are again hovering around 9 percent. You fondly recall those bygone days when 30-year ﬁxed rate
loans set below 6 percent. If you could only climb into a time machine.
You can. Here’s how.
When you assume a mortgage, you roll back the clock and take
over the mortgage of the seller at the same rate the seller is paying—
even if that rate sits well below current market rates. Years ago, nearly all
sellers could transfer their low-rate mortgages to their buyers. By the
early 1980s, however, most lenders had changed their mortgage contracts to include the “due on sale” clause (the notorious paragraph 17).
This clause prohibits routine assumptions and upon sale (or long-term
lease) requires sellers to pay off their mortgage balance.
As a result, too many people today erroneously believe that all assumption possibilities have died. To further the problem, loan reps seldom tell borrowers about assumptions because
assumptions originate directly between sellers and
Many assumable
their buyers. You cannot walk into a lender’s ofﬁce
and say, “I’d like one of those low-rate, assumable
mortgages still
mortgages that’s going to save me tens of thousands
exist.
of dollars.” No, before you can assume a real estate
loan, you must locate a seller who has one.

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

77

Which Sellers Can Offer Assumable Financing?
Generally, sellers who have ﬁnanced their properties with FHA, VA, or
most types of adjustable-rate mortgages can offer an assumption to their
buyers. Realtor Roger Rodell describes his experience with assumables
during a past period of high mortgage rates.
Roger Rodell’s Experience with Assumables Roger has said,“I’m
promoting low-interest assumable FHA/VA mortgages. True, buyers do
have to qualify to assume these loans. And some of the lenders I deal
with aren’t too eager to push through loan assumptions for a few hundred dollars in transfer fees (compared to the several thousand dollars
they earn for new loan originations). But the lower rates and monthly
payments make qualifying easier and the cash savings for buyers are tremendous. If a fairly priced
Loan assumptions
home with a low-interest-rate assumable hits the
market, I tell my buyers to go for it. Don’t try to pull
can save you big
the sellers down. When there’s a pile of $1,000 bills
dollars.
sitting in front of you, don’t get greedy and demand
an even better deal.”
Cut Your Interest Costs by Thousands “I’ve worked out the numbers,” Roger continues. “Over a period of 5 years on a $100,000 loan, as
compared to a 9 percent new mortgage, a 7 percent assumable will save
you $8,400 in interest. Over 10 years, the savings are nearly $17,000; and
over 25 years, you’ll keep an extra $42,000. And those numbers don’t include the $2,000 to $4,000 that an assumable might save you in points,
origination fees, appraisal, and closing costs. Now, you can see why I
refer to a good low-interest assumable as a pile of $1,000 bills.”

Short-Term Strategies
Under some situations, you might even gain by assuming a mortgage that
carries a higher-than-market interest rate. Say current rates are at 6.5 percent and you’re negotiating with a seller whose assumable mortgage has
a rate of 7.5 percent. Not worth assuming? Don’t jump to that conclusion. Assumptions usually cost less in terms of time, effort, and cash-toclose than new mortgage originations. So, this 7.5 percent loan
assumption could prove proﬁtable if, say,

78

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

1. You plan to own the property for only a year or two.
2. Inﬂation has dropped to almost zero, and interest rates are
sure to fall further. You want to time your new mortgage to
coincide with the lower rates that you foresee.
3. You plan to improve the property to increase its value. Then,
you’d like to get a new loan based on the higher property
value that you have created.
4. Your borrower proﬁle displays some warts. New ﬁnancing at
the lowest rates available could prove iffy. In contrast, qualifying for the assumption probably will not require the same exacting standards. One year or two years of perfect payments
could set you up to then qualify for a new loan as an “A” borrower.
How to Find Assumables Right now, millions of outstanding FHA
and VA loans (ﬁxed-rate and adjustable) permit assumptions. Plus, most
conventional (Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac) and portfolio lenders will allow
sellers to transfer their adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) loans to buyers.
To ﬁnd these loans requires you to ask sellers and investigate. Frequently, sellers or their realty agents either don’t know or don’t publicize mortgage
You can assume
assumptions. On the other hand, when interest rates
(as an ownerdo shoot up, the search for assumables becomes intense. Savvy sellers and agents then tout their asoccupant) any
sumables to favorably differentiate their properties
FHA/VA mortgage.
from others that require buyers to obtain more
costly new ﬁnancing.
Lower-Rate Assumable ARMs Nearly all adjustable-rate mortgages
include lifetime rate caps. No matter how high market interest rates
climb, ARM borrowers know that their loan rate will max out at 8, 9, 10,
or 12 percent (or possibly higher). Therefore, in periods of very high mortgage rates, you may ﬁnd
ARMs also offer
ARMs that are maxed out (or close to maxed out),
assumable
yet still sit below the going rates for new 30-year,
ﬁxed-rate mortgages. In that case, you’re sitting
possibilities.
pretty. Your (assumable) ARM rate can’t go up
(much), but it can go down.

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

79

Search for Sellers with Low-Equity Assumables
You’ve already seen that in periods of higher interest rates, you can slash
your interest costs by assuming a mortgage that carries a below currentmarket interest rate. In addition, assumables can help you buy with little
or nothing down. Just locate a seller who has bought (or reﬁnanced) recently with a low-down, high-LTV assumable mortgage. Within the past
three or four years, FHA and VA have originated millions of low- and
nothing-down home ﬁnance plans.
Due to the fact that the original loan balances
often add in closing costs and fees, most of these
buyers (now sellers) have built up little equity in
Assumables give
their homes. In many instances, you can assume for
you another lowless than 10 percent cash out-of-pocket. In those
down-payment
cases where sellers do own substantial equity, you
possibility.
might ask for a seller second or arrange a second
mortgage through a mortgage lender.

“Assume” a Nonassumable Mortgage
Nearly all non-FHA/VA long-term ﬁxed-rate mortgages include the once
infamous paragraph 17 (the “due on sale” clause). This clause reads (in
part) as follows:
¶ 17. If all or any part of the [mortgaged] property or an interest therein is sold or transferred by the Borrower without
Lender’s prior written consent . . . Lender may, at Lender’s
option, declare all the sums secured by this Mortgage to be
immediately due and payable.3
Very few people understand the precise wording of this clause, but that
wording carries signiﬁcant implications.

3. This clause now often shows up as paragraph 18. It might carry another number in some other
mortgage contracts.

80

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

What This Clause Does and Does Not Say
Notice that nothing in this paragraph prevents owners from selling you
their property without ﬁrst paying off their mortgage. This clause only
gives lenders the right to call the mortgage due and payable if such a
transfer occurs without “Lender’s prior written consent.”

You Can Assume a “Nonassumable” Mortgage
Nothing prevents you and a seller from asking a lender to give its written
consent. Why would the lender agree to accept your request? Here are
several reasons:
1. The sellers have fallen behind in their payments and you agree
to bring the mortgage current.
2. The interest rate on the mortgage equals or exceeds the current market rate. Lenders hate “portfolio runoff” of their market or above-market rate loans.
3. You, the sellers, or both parties give the lender substantial
amounts of other business (loans, CDs, savings and checking
accounts).
4. You (or the sellers) promise to move much of your banking
business to the lender.
Will these or any other reasons you can think of persuade the
lender to grant its consent? Sometimes yes, sometimes no. But it doesn’t
cost to ask. When the situation warrants, lenders do oblige.
Unfortunately, most people ask the wrong question and get the
wrong answer. When looking at a property, they query the seller or
agent, “Is the ﬁnancing assumable?” If the mortgage includes a due-onsale clause, the sellers or real estate agent will routinely answer,“No, the
mortgage is not assumable.” Wrong answer. The correct answer is,“Yes,
it’s assumable with the lender’s consent. If you would like to try to assume it, we can make the lender an offer.”

Buying Subject to: “Assuming” without Consent
Again I emphasize that the wording of the “due on sale” paragraph
does not stop owners from selling a mortgaged property to anyone

Forget the Banks, Seek Out Seller Financing

81

they choose to. Nor in such sales does the clause
require the sellers or the buyers to pay off the
loan. This clause merely gives the lender the right
can buy any
(or option) to call the loan due.
property with
Therefore, sometimes when buyers and sellers
“subject to”
believe that a lender won’t grant an assumption,
they complete the sale anyway and never inform
ﬁnancing.
the lender that the property has a new owner. The
buyer then continues to make the payments to the
lender on the same terms and interest rate that applied to the sellers.
Contrary to what some people say, this “subject to” technique is neither
illegal, immoral, or fattening. It does not even violate the mortgage contract.

Sellers willing, you

How I Have Used a “Subject To” I have used “subject to” ﬁnancing
with a number of property purchases. In 1981, for example, market
mortgage rates were at 16 percent. I bought a property “subject to” that
carried a mortgage rate of 10 percent. Because this property was a “ﬂipper,” I only owned it 18 months. But even during that short period, the
“subject to” mortgage arrangement saved me $17,000 in interest, points,
and closing costs.
Beginners Beware Several current authors and real estate get-richquick gurus are now peddling the “subject to” technique to the uninformed and inexperienced. Only instead of advising it for saving money
on interest, they’re pushing it to the credit-impaired as a means to buy a
property without lying prostrate before a lender. Here’s my advice: Beginners beware! Although this technique can prove appealing in some
situations—short-term holding periods, high interest mortgage environment, credit impaired—don’t
blindly fall for the sweet talk of the gurus. “Subject
Never use “subject
to” ﬁnancing holds risks for sellers and buyers. If
to” ﬁnancing
you don’t pay the lender on time, the lender chalks
without weighing
up late payments in the seller’s credit record. If the
your risks.
lender calls the loan due, someone must either pay
up or reﬁnance the property.
Will Lenders Really Call the Loan? Some real estate gurus say,
“Don’t worry. Here’s a bag of tricks. Use these tricks and the lender
won’t ﬁnd out about the property transfer. Surely what the lender can’t
see won’t hurt you. No problem. Just keep the lender in the dark.”

82

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

Do these tricks work? Maybe, maybe not. After suffering through
the tumultuous 1980s and early 1990s, lenders have become far more
savvy. Some time within a year or two after a sale, the lender will probably learn that the previous owner (and original borrower) has sold you
the mortgaged property.
“No worry,” the gurus say. “Even if the lender discovers the transfer,
chances are the lender won’t call the loan due. Most lenders follow a
‘don’t ask, don’t tell’ policy. But they’re not going to advertise their forbearance. As long as your mortgage payments keep ﬂowing in on time
and the property taxes and insurance get paid, your risks are small.”
On this point (for now at least) the gurus may be right. That’s because today interest rates on most “subject to” mortgages equal or exceed current market rates. When rates spike up, though, I suspect that
lenders will send out the enforcers. Stay prepared.
Use “subject to” ﬁnancing to solve a short-term need. But, over the
longer term, you’ll probably need to come up with another source of ﬁnancing.

C H A P T E R

6

Five More Techniques to
Finance Your Investments

You ﬁnd a property that you would like to buy, but the seller (or lender)
won’t let you use a mortgage assumption or “subject to” purchase. Instead, the seller proposes a wraparound mortgage. Especially in times
of high interest rates, a wraparound mortgage can provide a win-win solution for buyers and sellers.

Wraparounds Beneﬁt Buyers and Sellers
Wraparound ﬁnancing yields big savings for buyers at the same time that
it puts proﬁts into the pocket of the seller. Only the lender gets shortchanged. Here’s how a wraparound works to overcome higher market
interest rates:
Financial Facts
Asking price
Mortgage balance
Interest rate
Term remaining (years)
Monthly payment
Market interest rate

$200,000
$100,000
6%
20
$716
9%
83

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

84

You offer to buy the property for $200,000. If the seller agrees to ﬁnance $180,000 at 7.5 percent fully amortized over 20 years, your payment (P&I) equals $1,450 per month.1 The underlying $100,000
mortgage remains in place, and its monthly payments will be paid by the
seller. To complete the purchase, you sign a land contract, mortgage, or
trust deed with the seller.
Each month the seller collects $1,450 from you and pays the bank
a monthly mortgage payment of $716 for a net in the seller’s pocket of
$734 ($1,450 less $716). Because the seller has actually ﬁnanced only
$80,000 ($180,000 less the 100,000 still owed to the bank), he achieves
an attractive rate of return on his loan of 11.1 percent.
Seller ROI =

$8, 808
$80, 000

= 11.1%

Yet, you, too, gain. Had you ﬁnanced $180,000 with a bank at the
market rate of 9 percent amortized over 20 years, your payment would
total $1,619 per month instead of the $1,450 that
you’ll pay to the seller. The actual spread between
the current market interest rate, the seller’s old bank
You gain a lower
rate, and the interest rate you pay the seller will deinterest rate. The
pend on the motives and negotiating power of you
seller gains a high
and the seller. But this example shows how a wrapreturn.
around can beneﬁt both parties—true win-win ﬁnancing.2

Lease Options
Would you like to own a property? Yet, for reasons of blemished credit,
self-employment (especially those with off-the-books income or tax-

1. You also pay for the property insurance, property taxes, maintenance, and upkeep.
2. If the lender can enforce a due-on-sale clause, this technique does bring about that risk. In that
situation a wraparound works better as a short-term ﬁnancing strategy. If the lender calls, there
may be no long term.

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

85

minimized income), unstable income (commissions, tips), or lack of
cash, do you believe that you can’t currently qualify for a mortgage from
a lending institution? Then the lease option (a lease with an option to
purchase) might solve your dilemma. Properly structured, the lease option will permit you to acquire ownership rights in a property. At the
same time, it also gives you time to improve your ﬁnancial proﬁle (at
least from the perspective of a mortgage lender).

Here’s How It Works
As the name implies, the lease option combines two contracts into one: a
lease and an option to buy. Under the lease, you sign a rental agreement
that covers the usual rental terms and conditions (see Chapter 17) such as:
◆ Monthly rental rate
◆ Term of lease
◆ Responsibilities for repair, maintenance, and upkeep
◆ Sublet and assignment
◆ Pets, smoking, cleanliness
◆ Permissible property uses
◆ House rules (noise, parking, number of occupants)

The option part of the contract gives you the right to buy the
property at some future date. As a minimum, the option should include
(1) the amount of your option payment, (2) your purchase price for the
property, (3) the date on which the purchase option expires, (4) right of
assignment, and (5) the amount of the rent credits that will count toward the purchase price of the house.

Beneﬁts to Tenant-Buyers (an Eager Market)
In recent years, the beneﬁts of lease options to tenant-buyers have been
extolled by the respected, nationally syndicated real estate columnist
Robert Bruss as well as by most books written for ﬁrst-time homebuyers.
For example, in my book, Yes! You Can Own the Home You Want (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995, p. 59), I tell hopeful homebuyers,
There’s simply no question that lease options can bring home
ownership closer to reality for many renters in at least six ways:

86

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

1. Easier qualifying. Qualifying for a lease option may be
no more difﬁcult than qualifying for a lease (sometimes
easier). Generally, your credit and employment record
need meet only minimum standards. Most property owners will not place your ﬁnancial life under a magnifying
glass as would a mortgage lender.
2. Low initial investment. Your initial investment to get
into a lease option agreement can be as little as one
month’s rent and a security deposit of a similar amount.
At the outside, move-in cash rarely exceeds $5,000 to
$10,000, although I did see a home lease optioned at a
price of $1.5 million which asked for $50,000 up front.
3. Forced savings. The lease option contract typically
forces you to save for the down payment required when
you exercise your option to buy. Often, lease options
charge above-market rental rates and then credit perhaps
50 percent of your rent toward the down payment. The
exact amount is negotiable. And once you have committed yourself to buying, you should ﬁnd it easier to cut
other spending and place more money toward your
“house account.”
4. Firm selling price. Your option should set a ﬁrm selling
price for the home, or it should include a formula (perhaps a slight inﬂation-adjustment factor) that can be used
to calculate a ﬁrm price. Shop carefully, negotiate wisely,
and when you exercise your option in one to three years
(or whenever), your home’s market value could exceed
its option price. If your home has appreciated (or you’ve
created value through improvements—see below), you
may be able to borrow nearly all the money you need to
close the sale.
5. 100 percent ﬁnancing possible. You also can reduce the
amount of cash investment you will need to close your
purchase in another way: Lease-option a property that you
can proﬁtably improve through repairs, renovation, or cosmetics. After increasing the home’s value, you may be able
to borrow nearly all the money you need to exercise your
option to buy the property.
For example, assume that your lease option purchase
price is $75,000. Say by the end of one year, your rent credits equal $2,500. You now owe the sellers $72,500.

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

87

Through repairs, ﬁx-up work, and redecorating, you have
increased the property’s value by $10,000. Your home
should now be worth around $85,000. If you have paid
your bills on time during the previous year, you should be
able to locate a lender who will ﬁnance your purchase
with the full $72,500 you need to pay off the sellers. Or, as
another possibility, you could sell the property, pay the sellers $72,500 and use your remaining $12,500 in cash proceeds from the sale to buy another property.
6. Reestablish credit. A lease option also can help you buy
when you need time to build or reestablish a solid credit
record. Judy and Paul Davis wanted to buy a home before
prices or interest rates in their area rose above their reach.
But the Davises needed time to clear up credit problems
created by too much borrowing and Judy’s layoff. The
lease option proved to be the possibility that helped the
Davises achieve their goal of home ownership.
Experience shows that when prospective tenants and
homebuyers think through this list of beneﬁts, they become a
ready market for lease options.

Beneﬁts to Investors
Although the lease option might help you buy a property, it can also
prove to be a good way for you to rent out your investment property.
You can structure lease options in many ways. This type of agreement
can typically beneﬁt you as an investor in at least three ways: (1) lower
risk, (2) higher rents, and (3) guaranteed proﬁts.
Lower Risk As a rule, tenants who shop for a lease option will take
better care of your property than would average renters. Because your
lease-option tenants intend one day to own the house, they will treat it
more like homeowners than tenants. Also, they know that to qualify for
a mortgage they will need a near-perfect record of
rent payments. (If your tenant-buyers don’t know
Lease-option
that fact, make sure you impress it into their contenants take better
sciousness.) As a minimum, lease-option tenants expect to pay up front ﬁrst and last month’s rent, a
care of properties.
security deposit, and, more than likely, an option fee

88

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

of $1,000 to $5,000 (possibly more). Taken together, all of these factors
spell lower risk for you the property investor.
Higher Rents Lease-option tenants will agree to pay higher than
market rents because they know you will apply a part of that monthly
rent to the home’s purchase price. The tenants view these “rent credits”—actually they should be called purchase price credits—as forced
savings that will contribute toward a lender’s required down payment.
From your immediate standpoint, the higher
rent payments increase your monthly cash ﬂow and
Lease-option
boost your cash-on-cash return. In high-priced areas
tenants typically
where newly bought rental properties awaken a hungry alligator, the increased rent from a lease-option
pay higher rents.
rental may turn a negative cash ﬂow into a positive.
Guaranteed Proﬁts Experienced investors know that (on average)
fewer than 50 percent of lease-option tenants take advantage of their
right to buy their leased home. Sometimes they change their mind.
Sometimes their ﬁnances fail to improve as much as they hoped. Sometimes their personal circumstances shift (separation, divorce, job relocation, additional children).
Whatever the reason, the tenants forfeit (at
least in part) their rent credits, option fee, and any
Lease-option
ﬁx-up work they have performed around the house.
tenants often
As a sympathetic person, you may feel badly for the
forfeit their option
tenants. But as an investor, their loss means your
gain. Because your tenants did not follow through
payments and rent
with their purchase, you end up with more proﬁt
credits.
than you would have earned under a traditional
rental agreement.
Even if the tenants do buy, you still win, because in setting your option price, you built in a good proﬁt margin over the price you originally
paid for the property. The lease-option technique works especially well in
those transactions where you have bought at a bargain price. You net
more than you would have gained from a straight sale of the property because you didn’t have to pay high marketing costs or agent’s commissions.
For investors, the lease option makes for truly a win-win agreement. You win when your tenants buy, and you win when the tenants
don’t buy and forfeit their rights in the property.

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

89

How to Find Lease-Option Buyers and Sellers
To drive the best bargain on a lease option as a buyer/lessee, don’t limit
your search to sellers who advertise lease options. These sellers are trying to retail their properties. It will be tougher for you to ﬁnd a bargain
here. Instead, look for motivated for-sale-by-owner (FSBO) sellers in the
“Homes for Sale” classiﬁed ads. Or, you might also try property owners
who are running “House for Rent” ads. Often, the best lease-option sellers will not have considered the idea until you suggest it.
When you search for tenant-buyers, generally you will be able
to choose from three different classiﬁed newspaper ad categories:
(1) homes for sale, (2) homes for rent, and (3) the speciﬁc category “lease
option” that some newspapers include. Unfortunately, no one can say
which ad category will work best in your market. Experiment with each
of these choices. To learn which one is pulling the best responses, ask
your callers to tell you in which category they saw the ad. Don’t simply
assume that any single category listing will draw the largest number of
qualiﬁed callers.

A Creative Beginning with Lease Options (for Investors)
To start building wealth fast without investing much money up front, try
the lease-option approach of Suzanne Brangham. Although Suzanne
stumbled into her investment career quite fortuitously, you can follow
her path more purposely. From her book, Housewise (New York: HarperCollins, 1987, p. 39), here’s Suzanne’s story:
While searching for the ideal career, I was also looking for a
place to live. I located a lovely but dilapidated apartment
house. The building was making a painful transition from
rentals to condominiums. Units were for sale or rent. But sales
were practically nonexistent.
With my head held high, preliminary plans and a budget
tucked under my arm, I decided to make the manager an offer
he couldn’t refuse.
I told him that in lieu of paying the $800-a-month rent
that was being asked for a 2-bedroom, 2-bath unit, I would renovate the entire apartment. I would agree to spend $9,600 for

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

90

labor and materials, the equivalent of a full year of rent payments. Along with a 12-month lease, I also requested an option to buy the unit at its $45,000 asking price.
Three months later, Suzanne was on her way. She then bought her
renovated condo unit at her lease-option price of $40,000. Then, simultaneously, sold the unit to a buyer for $85,000. After accounting for renovation expenses, closing costs, and Realtor’s commission, she netted
$23,000. Suzanne no longer had a home, but she had found a career.
Twenty years, 23 homes, and 71 properties
later, Suzanne had become not just independently
wealthy, but a nationally recognized author, speaker,
A $40,000 condo
and entrepreneur. In her excellent book, Houselease option led to
wise, she tells about her renovation experiences
and the career she found by chance. As I’ve said, it’s
a multimilliona great book for anyone who would like to learn
dollar net worth.
hundreds of proﬁt-making ideas that can be applied
to buying and renovating ﬁxers.3

The Lease-Option Sandwich
The lease-option sandwich truly magniﬁes your proﬁt potential. Instead of
buying a property outright, you ﬁnd motivated sellers who are willing to
lease-option their property to you at both a bargain rental rate and a bargain
price.Typically,such sellers were not advertising their property as a lease option. They generally are trying to sell it. In fact, they may not even have
thought of the lease-option idea until you put a proposal in front of them.

Control without Cash
Ideally, through this lease option you gain control of the property for
two to ﬁve years. Your cash-out-of-pocket totals less than you probably
would have paid in closing costs had you immediately bought and ﬁnanced the property with a new mortgage.
3. See also my own book on this topic: Make Money with Fixer-Uppers and Renovations (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003).

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

91

Next, you spend some money on spruce-up expenses (if desirable) and readvertise the property as
a lease option. You ﬁnd tenant-buyers and sign them
The lease-option
up on a lease option with you as the lessor. Your
sandwich
tenant-buyers agree to pay you a higher monthly
maximizes your
rental and a higher option price than you’ve negotiated for yourself in your role as lessee with the
leverage.
property owners. You proﬁt from the markup in
price and option money.
Your rate of return skyrockets because you gain control of a property with almost no cash investment. The up-front money you’ve collected from your tenant-buyers more than covers the amount you paid
as option money to the property owners. Essentially, you’re buying
wholesale and selling retail—without actually having to pay for your inventory.

Does the Lease-Option Sandwich Really Work?
Theoretically, it can work. (Just make sure you protect yourself fully in
the lease-option contracts you sign.) Robert Allen and James Lumley, for
example, two well-known real estate investors and book authors, claim
to have used this technique successfully to generate big proﬁts with little or no cash.
Personally, I wouldn’t try it. For my taste, giving someone an option
to buy a property that I don’t yet own seems fraught with dangers. Nevertheless, in theory this technique can yield high returns. So, if you’re interested in biting into a lease-option sandwich, read Lumley’s 5 Magic
Paths to Making a Fortune in Real Estate (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2000). Also, Peter Conti and David Finkel advocate this technique
in their book Making Big Money Investing in Real Estate (Chicago:
Dearborn, 2002).

Lease-Purchase Agreements
As a practical matter,the lease-purchase agreement works about the same as
a lease option. However, instead of gaining the right to either accept or reject a property,the lease-purchaser commits to buying it. As an investor,you

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

92

can often persuade reluctant sellers to accept your lease-purchase offer,
even though they may shy away from a lease option. The lease-purchase
offer seems much more deﬁnite because you are saying that you will buy the
property—you would just like to defer closing until some future date (say,
six months to ﬁve years more or less) that works for you and the sellers.

“Seems” More Deﬁnite
I say “seems” more deﬁnite because there is a loophole. You can (and
should) write an escape clause into your purchase offer called “liquidated damages.”With a liquidated damages clause, the sellers could not
sue you to go through with your purchase (speciﬁc performance) if you
chose to back out. Nor could they sue you for money damages that they
may have suffered due to your failure to buy. Instead, the liquidated damage clause simply permits your sellers to pocket
your earnest money deposit.
Always use a
In effect, your earnest money really acts like an
liquidated damage
option payment. No matter what the purchase contract appears to say, in reality you have not ﬁrmly
clause in your
committed to buy.
purchase offers.

Amount of the Earnest Money Deposit
The real ﬁrmness of either a lease-option or a lease-purchase contract
lies in the amount of the up-front money the seller receives—regardless
of whether it’s called an “option” fee or an “earnest money” deposit. If
you want to really show a seller that you intend to complete a leaseoption or a lease-purchase transaction, put a larger amount of cash on
the table. By the same token, if you truly do want to “keep your options
open,” negotiate the smallest “walkaway” fee that you can, even if it
means conceding elsewhere in the agreement.

Contingency Clauses
You also can escape from your obligation to buy a property through the use
of contingency clauses. If the contingency (property condition, ability to
obtain ﬁnancing, lawyer approval, sale of another property, etc.) isn’t met,

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

93

you can walk away from a purchase and at the same time rightfully demand
the return of your earnest money or option fee. Contingencies, option fees,
and earnest money deposits are further discussed in Chapter 16.

Master-Lease an Apartment Building
To make money in real estate, you need to control a property. The most
common way to obtain this control is through ownership. Some investors, though, don’t buy their multiunit properties—at least not right
away. Instead, they master-lease them. As we just discussed, buyers and
sellers typically use a lease-option agreement to convey condominiums
and single-family homes. But to acquire (without purchase) apartment
buildings, you would use a master lease.

A Turnaround Property
Say you locate a 12-unit apartment building that is poorly managed and
needs upgrading. You might offer to buy the property. But you really
don’t have the ﬁnancial power to arrange new ﬁnancing, and the owner
doesn’t want to sell the property using a land contract or purchasemoney mortgage.
Currently, the property barely produces enough cash ﬂow to pay
expenses, property taxes, and mortgage payments.
The owner wants to turn this money pit into a moneymaker, but lacks the will to invest time, effort,
You control the
money, and talent.
property without
The solution: master-lease the entire building
putting in much
and guarantee the owner a steady no-hassle monthly
income. In return, you obtain the right to upgrade
cash.
the building and manage the property to increase its
net operating income (NOI).
Generally, a master lease gives you possession of the property for a period of 3 to 15 years and an option to buy at a prearranged price. During
the period of your lease, you would pocket the difference between what
you pay to operate the property, including lease payments to the owner,
and the amounts you collect from the individual tenants who live in each of
the apartments. This technique resembles the lease-option sandwich that

94

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

we discussed earlier, only it applies to multiple-unit buildings as opposed to
single-family houses. Here’s how the before-and-after numbers might look:
Before (Owner Management)
Gross potential income at $500 per unit
Vacancy losses at 15%

$72,000
10,800

Effective gross income
$61,200
Expenses
Utilities
14,400
Maintenance
8,360
Advertising
2,770
Insurance
3,110
Property taxes
6,888
Miscellaneous (evictions, attorney fees, bad debts, vandalism,
pest control, bookkeeping, etc.)
5,000
Total expenses
40,528
Net operating income
20,672
Mortgage payments
19,791
Before-tax cash ﬂow (cash throw-off)

$881

After (Your Management)
Gross potential income at $575 per unit
Vacancy losses at 4%

$82,800
3,312

Effective gross income
Expenses
Utilities
Maintenance and upkeep
Advertising
Insurance
Property taxes
Miscellaneous (evictions, attorney fees, bad debts,
vandalism, pest control, bookkeeping, etc.)

$79,488

Total expenses
Net operating income
Leasehold payments to owner (master lessor)

28,530
50,958
25,000

Before-tax cash ﬂow (master lessee)

$25,958

2,230
13,200
670
2,630
7,300
2,500

Five More Techniques to Finance Your Investments

95

How to Achieve Your Turnaround
How can you achieve such a spectacular turnaround? (1) Upgrade the
property and implement a thorough maintenance program; (2) your
more attractive property and more attentive management will attract
and retain high-quality tenants; (3) meter the apartment units individually to reduce utilities; (4) raise rents to reﬂect the more appealing condition of the property and the more pleasant ambiance created by the
new higher-quality, neighbor-considerate, rule-abiding tenants; (5) shop
for lower-cost property and liability insurance coverage; and (6) reduce
turnover and encourage word-of-mouth tenant referrals to eliminate
most advertising expenses.
Not only did this turnaround increase the
Property
property’s net income (NOI), but, correspondingly,
turnarounds
the higher NOI, lower risk, and more attractive
apartments lifted the value of the building. This
increase cash
means that when you exercise your option to buy,
ﬂows and boost
you will be able to arrange 100 percent ﬁnancing to
the property’s
pay off the owner, yet still give the lender a 70 to 80
percent loan-to-value ratio as measured against the
value.
property’s new higher value.

Sell Your Lease-Option Rights
Instead of going through with your purchase of master-leased property,
you might sell your leasehold and option rights to another investor.
Given the much higher NOI that you’ve created, you can assign your
rights at a very good price markup. In effect, an investor would pay for
the right to earn $25,958 per year (plus future rent increases) for the remaining term of the master lease. He would also gain the right to buy
the property at a now bargain price.
As you can see from this example, a master lease with option to buy
can create signiﬁcant proﬁt opportunities for investor-entrepreneurs
who are willing to turn a poorly managed, run-down apartment building
into an attractive, effectively operated residence for high-quality tenants.

C H A P T E R

7

How to Come Up with the
Money to Close

You’ve now learned several dozen ways that you can acquire investment
properties with little- or nothing-down ﬁnancing. Yet, even 100 percent
loans typically require at least some cash to close.
Plus, you may ﬁnd a great mortgage assumption or “subject to” deal
where the seller needs (wants?) to cash out the substantial equity that
he has accumulated in his property. So, for most of your investments, you
will need to bring some cash to the closing table.
Here are 23 ways that you can use to come up with all or part of
this money.

Cash Out Some of Your Current Home’s Equity
A low-cost home
equity loan makes
an excellent
source of cash to
expand your real
estate wealth.
96

If you’ve owned a home for a number of years,
you’ve no doubt built up tens (perhaps hundreds)
of thousands of dollars in equity. Through either a
home equity loan or a cash-out reﬁnance, you can
raise money at quite favorable rates. In fact, I know
of some high-equity homeowners who are reﬁnancing their homes with larger mortgages and then
using the net proceeds for cash bids on ﬁx-up properties at discount prices.

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

97

If your home has proved to be a good investment, now’s the time to
leverage up. Put some of that equity into buying and renovating properties. You might even consider downsizing. Move (at least temporarily)
into a smaller abode. To raise even more cash and credit power for investing in real estate, you could—Heaven forbid—even go back to renting for a while.
Don’t tie up large chunks of capital in your house when you could
use that money to accelerate your wealth building.

Bring in Partners
Who do you know that would like to earn the proﬁts that real estate can
provide, but lacks the time or inclination to take an active role? Such investing partners can provide cash to the deal and
they also may enhance your credibility and borrowing power.
Right now,
Although space here doesn’t permit a full dismillions of people
cussion of the legal, tax, and practical issues that
partnerships can entail, I will urge you to look into
with money would
this approach to raising cash for investment. I have
like to invest in
brought in a partner on a number of my property inreal estate.
vestments. All have worked out well for both me
and the partners.

Attract Money with a Business Plan
Later, after you gain experience and credibility, you will be able to raise
money based on your reputation and achievements.
When you’re just getting started, though, I recomPartners can
mend that you write out a business plan for two reaprovide the
sons:
money. You
1. Think it through. Writing out a plan forces you
provide the talent,
to think through your investment project and
time, and business
goals from start to ﬁnish. As you write, you clarify.
You see glitches (and perhaps opportunities) that
plan.
more casual analysis frequently misses.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

98

2. Credibility. Which of these approaches would most persuade you to invest in a property? Someone simply asks,
“Hey, how would you like to invest $20,000 in a real estate
deal I’m putting together?” Or she says,“Here’s a copy of my
business plan for a real estate investment that I’m acquiring.
As you can see from this market and ﬁnancial analysis, a
$20,000 investment will pay you back $30,000 within six
months.”
To write this plan, you would highlight the market and property data
that we discuss later. To further boost your credibility and forthrightness, you should also pinpoint risk factors and how you’re prepared to
deal with them. For example,
◆ What if interest rates go up?
◆ What if your repair and improvement costs exceed the estimate?
◆ What if the rent raises or value-enhancing improvements take

longer than planned?
◆ What if rental or sales prices begin to soften?

Don’t
overpromise.
Anticipate risks.

All smart investors realize that no one can
perfectly predict the future. You can,
though, anticipate problems. Then take
steps beforehand to alleviate, reduce, or
eliminate them. “What if” scenarios should
stimulate you to build safeguards into your
plans and prepare alternative exit strategies.

Seek Favored Partners

Choose a person
with character
ﬁrst, money
second.

Because even the most promising partnerships (that is, marriages) can break down
into contentiousness, choose your real estate partners carefully. Deal only with someone who’s reasonable, easy to get along
with, and lives by a personal code of integrity and fairness. If plans go awry as they
sometimes do, you want a partner who will

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

99

sit down and look at reasonable and fair ways to resolve the cause of the
detour and cooperatively steer the investment back on track.
You do not want a partner who insists that you sign a 10-page, ﬁneprint partnership agreement that has been drafted by his or her lawyer.
The more you let the lawyers intercede into your agreement, the more
likely you and your partner will come to discord. Of course, here I’m
talking about small deals—not multimillion-dollar agreements, when like
it or not, the lawyers will probably actively participate in the partnership
negotiations.
Most lawyers would like you to believe that a good partnership requires an “airtight” partnership agreement that nails down precisely
each partner’s rights and responsibilities. Wrong! A good partnership
requires good people as partners. If, for small deals,
you (or your partner) think that you need a 10page, ﬁne-print document of legal jargon to set the
No ﬁne-print
terms of your agreement, that partnership is
contract can
headed for trouble.
substitute for your
In your eagerness to do a deal, never jump for
the
money
until you’re perfectly conﬁdent that your
partner’s
investor will make a great partner. No contract can
character.
ever substitute for the character of the people involved.

Second Mortgages
Say that you’ve found a great property, a motivated seller, and a lowinterest-rate assumable (or “subject to”) mortgage. You face only one problem. The existing mortgage has a balance of $190,000, the owner wants a
price of $225,000. You can only come up with $20,000 in cash. How can
you cover the $15,000 gap? Use a second mortgage.
A holder of a second mortgage simply stands in
back
of the claims of the ﬁrst mortgage holder.
Seller seconds
Upon foreclosure, the sales proceeds go ﬁrst to pay
reduce the amount
the highest priority liens. Then, if any money is left,
of cash you need
lower-priority claims like a second mortgage are
paid. On any given property, a second mortgage
to close.
lender faces more risk than does the ﬁrst lender.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

100

To arrange second-mortgage ﬁnancing, ask the
seller to carry back a loan for $15,000 of your purchase price. If the seller won’t or can’t oblige you
lenders grant
with this second mortgage, turn to a bank or private
second mortgages.
mortgage company to provide the money. In the
world of investment real estate (and increasingly,
too, in the world of homebuying), cash-short buyers use second mortgages to help close the gap between the amount of the ﬁrst mortgage ﬁnancing and the purchase price of the property.
All types of

Personal Savings
How much cash can you raise from your personal savings and investments? If your answer comes in at anything under ﬁve ﬁgures (not
counting decimals!), you need to work through some ﬁscal ﬁtness exercises. For a philosophy that leads to sensible spending and wealth building see The Millionaire Next Door by Thomas Stanley and William
Danko (Atlanta: Longstreet, 1996). Their PWAs (prodigious wealth accumulators) rarely conspicuously ﬂaunt their wealth. Virtually every ﬁnancial expert agrees that before you can invest proﬁtably, you must learn to
spend well below your means. Save, save, save.

Sell Unnecessary Assets
Other than your house, can you sell, trade, or downsize any assets? Do
you own cars, boats, jet skis, or expensive furniture? What about that nolonger-pursued stamp or coin collection? I recently talked with one of
my readers who wanted to invest in properties but said she lacked cash.
“What would you recommend?” she asked. When I
queried her about assets that she could draw on, she
Nearly everyone
admitted that she and her husband owned a vacation property at Lake Tahoe with $150,000 of equity.
owns assets that
Do you see the problem here? All of us love
they could sell to
our possessions. We don’t want to give them up. But
raise investment
ask yourself whether those assets are truly worth
the price you pay to own them. Several years back, I
cash.
owned a Porsche 911. Obviously, that’s a car that I

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

Learn to live with
less so you can
eventually enjoy
far more.

Build wealth
to achieve
ﬁnancial
freedom—not

101

loved to drive. But when I calculated my out-ofpocket costs of ownership plus the money I could
earn by investing the cash that I had tied up in the
car, the decision to sell became a no-brainer.
Your decision to sell wasteful assets becomes
even more important when you’re shelling out money
for monthly payments. Possessions you ﬁnance not
only eat up your cash, they also drag down your credit
score and borrowing power. Get rid of those unnecessary assets now. The returns you earn over time will
permit you to later replace them many times over.
(Also, as I have noted, you may ﬁnd that cutting back
on your costly toys and material possessions actually
leads you to a higher quality of life.)

costly possessions.

Down-Payment Assistance
From Oakland, California, to Atlanta, Georgia, from Boston to Miami, from
Chicago to Houston, city and county governments and not-for-proﬁt housing organizations have been providing down-payment
assistance to persons who have not owned a home
Local governments
during the past three years. Typically, these grants
range from $1,500 to $5,000, but I’ve seen them go as
give buyers downhigh as $15,000. See, for example, the front-page Wall
payment money.
Street Journal article “Buyers Get Free Down Payments on Homes” (December 10, 2002).
To learn what is offered in your area, telephone your city or county
department of housing ﬁnance or community development. Often these
programs ﬁt right in with your efforts to buy and renovate ﬁxers because they may be targeted toward neighborhoods to prime them for revitalization. The same government and not-for-proﬁt agencies may also
provide low-cost money to cover rehab and renovation expenses.

Easy Money—Hard Terms
On those occasions when you exhaust all other sources of cash and ﬁnancing, you’ve got a possibility that I hesitate to mention, but will do so

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

102

Be careful. “Easymoney” lenders
play rough if you
don’t pay on time.

only in the cause of thoroughness. In some limited
situations, you may want to turn to an easy-money
lender. Within the real estate industry, such lenders
actually work under the label of “private money” or
“hard money.” I call them easy-money lenders because they will loan you money to buy, improve, or
reﬁnance almost any type of property as long as you
can fog a mirror.

Predatory Lending
In fact, some easy-money lenders intentionally loan money to people
who stand very little chance of paying it back. Why? Because these
lenders want to foreclose the property. Such lenders proﬁt from this tactic for three reasons:
1. Low loan-to-value ratio (LTV). Easy-money lenders only
make loans where the property value greatly exceeds the
amount borrowed.
2. Immediate collection. Unlike reputable mortgage lenders,
these easy-money folks don’t know the concept of forbearance. Miss a payment and they will sic the lawyers on you as
soon as legally possible.
3. High late fees and penalties. Not only do these predatory
lenders go after the delinquent amount owed on the mortgage, they make sure that you pay dearly for your failure to
make your payments as scheduled.
Both the state and federal governments have initiated an enforcement campaign against illegal predatory lending practices. Two such
lenders (Citigroup and Household Lending) recently
paid a total of $700 million to settle charges of bilkBe wary of
ing tens of thousands of their mortgage customers.
Although easy-money lenders do make borrowing
predatory lenders.
easier for the credit-impaired, such lenders also ex-

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

103

pect to receive a huge (and perhaps illegal or unconscionable) proﬁt
from these hard-money loans.

Why Would You Want to Deal with This Type of “Easy Money” Lender?
Lenders who specialize in easy money with hard
terms appeal to three types of borrowers: (1) the
Hard money might
poorly educated who don’t really understand the
serve a short-term
terms and costs of the loan, (2) those who need
money so desperately that they’ll sign away their fuproﬁt opportunity.
ture for immediate relief from some ﬁnancial difﬁculty, and (3) optimistic real estate investors who
care nothing about the hard terms of the easy money because they imagine high proﬁts from their venture. Assuming that you’re not a type 1 or
2 borrower, I will focus on a type 3 situation.
The Optimistic Entrepreneur Say you ﬁnd a desperate (that is, motivated) property owner who is willing to sell you his $300,000 “as-is”
property for $220,000 if you can come up with the cash within 10 days.
You know that after putting in $25,000 for repairs and sweat equity, you
could sell the house for at least $335,000. You want to grab this deal before someone else beats you to it. But how can you raise $220,000 on
such short notice?
The answer: An easy-money-hard-terms lender.
Hard term-lenders
What will this loan cost you? Can’t say for sure because the private mortgage industry includes thouspecialize in fastsands of small players as well as some of the major
cash deals.
mortgage lenders like Citigroup (which runs its
hard-money operations through no-name subsidiaries). Each player sets its own costs, terms, and loan-to-value ratios.
The structure of the deals also varies over time. Sometimes too much
money is chasing too few borrowers. At other times, too many borrowers are chasing after too little money.
With all of these caveats in view,Table 7.1 shows how your deal in
this situation might look.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

104

Table 7.1

You Might Proﬁt Using Hard Money

Source

Cash to You

Amount borrowed
Interest at 15% p.a. (6 months)
Settlement costs
Mortgage broker fee at 5%
Mortgage payback

$220,000

Total
Net cost of funds for 6 months

$220,000

Cash You Pay
$ 16,500
9,000
11,000
$220,000
$256,500
$36,500

Your Expected Proﬁt
Sales price of renovated property
Marketing costs at 6%
Cost of funds
Acquisition cost of property
Costs of improvements

$335,000
20,100
36,500
220,000
$ 25,000

Proﬁt (before tax)

$ 78,500

Are these numbers realistic? Yes. Do they reﬂect a norm? No. As I
said, easy-money lenders remain idiosyncratic. Each deal is negotiated according to the particulars of the loan, the property, the lender, and the borrower. No Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae dictates rules. Plus, this deal showed
a great buy on the property, which is possible but not typical.
Nevertheless, this example does indicate that, on occasion, you can
earn a good proﬁt—even after paying the high costs
of a hard-terms lender. Before you enter into such a
loan agreement, though, take off your rose-colored
Before you sign up
glasses. Sharpen your pencil. Critically work
for hard money,
through the numbers. Remember to include a libtake off your roseeral amount for the oops factor. If the proﬁt still outweighs costs and risks, maybe you should go for it.
colored glasses.
Where to Find This Easy Money The classiﬁed
ad section of most city newspapers includes a category entitled,“Loans,”
“Financing,” or perhaps “Money to Lend.” More often than not, these advertisers represent easy-money-hard-terms lenders. Also, look in your telephone book listings under mortgages and mortgage brokers. You’re
looking for listings that use language such as “credit problems okay,”“non

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

PRIVATE LENDER
BRIDGE LOANS, 1 WEEK CLOSING
$500,000 - $300 MILLION
BROKERS WELCOME
555-5555
Loans secured by Real Estate,
(even raw land) or any ﬁxed asset.
No up front fee until agreement signed
http//www.kennedyfunding.com
COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE LOANS
LOOK, LIKE & LEND
NO APPRAISAL. 1 WEEK CLOSING
No adv. Fee. LES 555-5555

Box 7.1

105

NEED MONEY FAST?
3 day closing. $100K - $10 Million
Real estate secured. No credit check.
No advance fee. 555-5555
COMMERCIAL LOANS
Mixed-use, Multi-Unit Busn., Const. No
Fee until agreement. All Type Credit.
$100K + Low Rates 555-5555
A Better Alternative
Good, bad and no credit
Call for 1st & 2nd
Mortgages WE BUY
MORTGAGES Midtown
Mortgage Co., Inc. 555-5555
4200 NW 43 St., # A-1

Sample Ads for Hard Money Lenders

conforming,”“secured,”“fast closing,”“investor loans,”“rehab acquisitions,”
“we buy mortgages and land contracts,” or “no income veriﬁcation.” Box
7.1 shows a sampling of “easy-money” ads from the New York Times and a
local newspaper.

Use Credit Cards
Although it’s one of the more risky techniques of creative ﬁnancing, some
investors take advantage of every credit card offer they receive in the mail.
Then when they need quick cash to close a deal, they raise $5,000,
$10,000, or even $50,000 from cash advances. Investors have been known
to pay all cash for a property with the entire sum
raised from credit cards.
Naturally, neither you nor anyone else should use
Remember,
cash
advances for long-term ﬁnancing. On occasion,
though, too many
though, you might ﬁnd plastic a good source to cover
credit cards lower
short-term needs. You may, for example, ﬁnd a “steal”
that you can renovate and immediately ﬂip (resell) at a
your credit score.
great proﬁt.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

106

Personal Loans
In the days before credit card cash advances (which today are the most
popular type of personal loan), personal loans were called signature
loans. As you build your wealth through growing real estate equity, you’ll
ﬁnd that many lenders will gladly grant you signature loans for $10,000,
$25,000, or even $100,000, if your credit record and net worth can support repayment. You can use the money from these signature loans to
buy even more real estate. (Signature loans typically charge much lower
fees and interest rates than do credit card cash advances.)
Although some mortgage lenders set rules against using personal
loans for property down payments, a seller who ﬁnances your purchase
will seldom investigate the source of your down-payment money.

Sweat Equity (Creating Value through Renovations)
To enhance value through improvements and renovations, buy a ﬁx-up
property with 100 percent ﬁnancing. Say you ﬁnd a property that should
sell (in tip-top condition) for around $300,000. Yet, because of its sorry
state of repair as well as an eager seller, you can buy this property for
$160,000 with short-term no-money-down owner ﬁnancing. You then
contribute your labor and buy $10,000 in materials with your credit card
(or signature loan).
Once you complete your work and bring the property up to its
$300,000 market value, you arrange a 70 percent
LTV mortgage with a lender. Then with the loan proceeds of $210,000, you pay off the seller and your
Sweat equity
credit card account. Voilà—you not only have
builds instant
achieved 100 percent ﬁnancing for your acquisition
wealth.
price and expenses, you’ve created $130,000 of instant equity (wealth).

Eliminate Your Down Payment with Pledged Collateral
If you don’t have enough money for a big down payment and you can’t
(or don’t want to) buy mortgage insurance or obtain a second mortgage,

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

107

you’ve got another possibility. It’s called pledged collateral. “We don’t
care where the collateral comes from,” says Elmer Frank of First American Savings, “As long as we feel secure, we’ll consider the loan. We’ve
taken stocks, bonds, mortgages, retirement accounts, and once a Mercedes 300 SL Gullwing. We did, though, refuse to accept a racehorse.”

Pledged Retirement Accounts
In terms of popularity, Elmer Frank adds,“Retirement accounts have become one of the most frequent sources of pledged collateral for our ﬁrsttime home buyers. We don’t even require that the account belong to the
buyers. We’ll accept funds from any close family
member. On no-down-payment mortgages, we usuThe account you
ally like to see 30 percent, but for good customers,
we’ve gone as low as 20 percent.”
pledge need not be
“In other words,” Elmer continues, “we’ll give
your own.
homebuyers or investors a no-down-payment, 100
percent loan, if, say, those buyers (or close relatives)
move enough of their 401(k) funds to our bank to offset 20 or 30 percent of the home’s purchase price. Last week, we closed a loan for a
young couple in their 30s who bought a $165,000 property. Between
them, they earn $70,000 a year; but they had little savings because
they’ve been rapidly paying off their student loans. We ﬁnanced their full
purchase price without private mortgage insurance and the wife’s
mother deposited $45,000 of her 401(k) monies with us.”

Other Types of Pledged Collateral
Retirement funds aren’t the only source of pledged collateral you can
use to offset your lack of a down payment. As Elmer Frank points out, his
bank (like some other lenders) will accept nearly any type of asset (savings account, stocks, bonds, perhaps even a valuable antique automobile). If you or your parents have built up a large equity in their home,
many lenders will accept that equity as pledged collateral.
If your parents (or other close relatives) would reﬁnance their
home (or other real estate), you might be able to use a blanket mortgage
to buy a home with no down payment. Say your parents owe $130,000
on their home now valued at $510,000. You want to buy a property

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

108

priced around $185,000. Many mortgage lenders would loan you and
your parents $315,000 so your parents could pay off their old mortgage
balance of $130,000 and you could buy the property you want at a price
of $185,000 ($130,000   $185,000 = $315,000).
The lender would then record a blanket mortgage for $215,000 to
cover both properties that together have a value of $695,000 ($510,000
  $185,000). You and your parents would share responsibility for making the monthly payments. You would have bought your property with
no cash down and without having to pay mortgage insurance.

Student Loans
As I have mentioned, I bought my ﬁrst investment properties while I was
still in college. While my friends were using their college loans to pay for
their rent, food, clothing, tuition, and books, I used my student loan
money to acquire real estate. While my friends were stacking up debt, I
was building wealth.
Do you have access to any easy money like student loans? If so,
there’s the cash you need to close your ﬁrst investment. Student loans
work great because not only do you get a low interest rate, often you
don’t have to start paying them back until after you’ve been out of
school for a year. Remember, too, I sought out seller ﬁnancing—and the
sellers (unlike banks) didn’t ask where I was getting my down payment.

Use More Creative Finance
In addition to the techniques just discussed, here are several other more
creative ways to fund your cash to close:
◆ Agree to swap services or products. Does the seller need

some service or expertise that you can render? Inventory your
skills (law, medicine, dentistry, writing, advertising, carpentry, accounting, landscaping, architectural, etc.). Include all talents and
expertise of your profession, trade, and avocation. How about
products? Say you own a radio station or newspaper. Trade off

How to Come Up with the Money to Close

109

advertising time or space for a down payment. Anything you can
produce, deliver, or sell wholesale (at cost) might work.
◆ Borrow (or reduce) the real estate commission. Although
most brokers and sales agents generally hate this technique, on
occasion buyers and sellers ask the agents involved in a transaction to defer payment until some later date. Also some agents actually prefer to have their commissions in the deal. In doing so,
they avoid income taxes on these fees, while at the same time
they build wealth through their interest earnings or by receiving
a “piece of the action” (future proﬁts from the later sale of the
property).
◆ Simultaneously sell off part of the property. Does the
property include an extra lot, a mobile home, timber, oil, gas, or
air or mineral rights? If so, ﬁnd a buyer who will pay you cash for
such rights. In turn, this money will help you close the deal.
◆ Prepaid rents and tenant security deposits. When you buy
an income property, you are entitled to the existing tenants’ security deposits and prepaid rents. Say you close on June 2. The
seller of a fourplex is holding $4,000 in damage deposits and
$3,800 in tenant rent money prepaid for the month of June. Together, the deposits and prepaid rents amount to $7,800. In most
transactions, you can use these monies (credits at closing) to reduce your cash-to-close.
◆ Create paper. You’ve asked the seller to accept owner ﬁnancing with 10 percent down. She balks. She believes the deal puts
her at risk. Alleviate her fears and bolster her security. Offer her
a lien against your car or a second (or third) mortgage on another property you own. Specify that when your principal paydown and the property’s appreciation lift your equity to 20
percent (LTV of 80 percent), she will remove the security lien
she holds against your other property.
◆ Lease-option sandwich. Don’t forget the lease-option sandwich (Chapter 6). If you can pull it off, your lease-option buyers
supply you with all (or nearly all) of the cash you will need to
take over control of the property from the sellers.

C H A P T E R

8

Here’s How to Qualify

Up to this point, you’ve learned several dozen ways to raise the money
you will need to invest in real estate. Some of these techniques require
you to pass under a lender’s microscope. Others do not.
In the main, I’ve written this chapter to help you anticipate and prepare for those instances when you must go through a mortgage lender’s
formal qualifying process.
This chapter will also help you deal successfully with potential investment partners, real estate agents, and OWC sellers. Even though
these folks won’t scrutinize your ﬁnances as closely as a mortgage
lender, they will still want to see evidence that they can count on you to
live up to your promises.

Be Wary of Prequalifying (and Preapproval)
Most supposed experts in mortgage ﬁnance give this advice:“Before you
even begin to shop for a property, meet with a lender to get prequaliﬁed
for a loan.1 With prequaliﬁcation you’ll learn exactly how much property
you can afford. You won’t waste time looking at properties outside your
price range.”
1. Some say “preapproved.” But that advice, too, fails to address the critical points raised here.

110

Here’s How to Qualify

111

Superﬁcially, this advice makes sense. Why try to order ﬁlet
mignon on a hamburger budget? Yet, at a deeper level, realize that this
advice to prequalify does not necessarily promote your needs. You may
be able to borrow far more than a prequaliﬁcation (or preapproval)
suggests.

Why Prequalifying Sometimes Underqualiﬁes
In theory, prequalifying (preapproval) for a loan seems to make sense. If
you look at properties you can’t afford (unless you’re just curious), you
waste your time and it may psych you up for a big letdown. But here’s
the rub: No 10-minute computer-qualifying exercise can measure you
for a loan program as a tailor might measure you for
a new suit.
No simple qualifying formula can even begin
Preapproval
to
accurately
tell you “how much mortgage you can
programs are too
afford,” or more important,“how much property you
simplistic.
should buy.” Plugging your current credit and ﬁnances into a prequaliﬁcation or preapproval computer program pushes aside the real questions you should be asking:
1. What are your goals to build wealth?
2. How do your budget constraints differ (positively or negatively) from those assumptions embedded in the prequaliﬁcation program?
3. Are your current spending, saving, and investing habits consistent with your life priorities?
4. How long do you plan to own the property?
5. What steps can you take to improve your credit record or
credit scores?
6. What steps can you take to improve your qualifying ratios?
7. What percentage of your wealth do you want to hold in real
estate investments?
8. What types of real estate ﬁnancing (other than those loan programs offered by the lender you’re talking with) might best
promote your goals for cost savings or wealth building?
9. What types of real estate ﬁnancing (other than those loan programs offered by the lender you’re talking with) might best
enhance your affordability?

112

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

10. What type of property (ﬁxer, foreclosure, duplex, fourplex,
multiunit apartment building, single-family house, condo, etc.)
might best ﬁt into your ﬁnancial goals?
Although a relative few highly professional loan representatives
will help you accurately address important ﬁnancial and life-planning issues such as those listed above, most will not. The majority of loan reps
lack the time, the intellectual acumen, and the practical knowledge necessary to guide you to your best investment and borrowing decisions. Never forget: Loan reps, like car
salespeople, want you to buy the products they are
Loan reps want
selling. Would you expect unbiased auto advice
you to buy what
from the sales agent at the Buick dealer? No? Then
they are selling.
why would you expect unbiased advice from the
loan rep at the Old Faithful Mortgage Company?

Where You Stand versus Where You Want to Go
Most mortgage lenders emphasize where you stand ﬁnancially today. You
must look into your personal future. Most lenders
emphasize your ability and willingness to pay your
You determine
mortgage as evidenced only by their approval formula. You need not accept this narrow view. You
how much
must decide for yourself. Should I buy more (or less)
property you can
property than the standard formulas suggest? And
afford.
correspondingly, should I borrow more (or less) than
this lender’s guidelines recommend?

You Can Make Your Qualifying Ratios Look Better
If you buy anything up to a four-unit property (condo, single-family
house, duplex, triplex, quad) and ﬁnance it through a mortgage lender,
you will probably need to pass through the lender’s qualifying standards.
A majority of lenders will assess your borrowing power through the use
of two qualifying ratios: (1) the housing cost (front) ratio, and (2) the
total debt (back) ratio. These ratios will apply regardless of whether you
apply for owner-occupied ﬁnancing or investor ﬁnancing.

Here’s How to Qualify

Always search for
ways to improve
your qualifying

113

Run-of-the-mill loan reps will merely plug your
ﬁnancial data into their computer automated underwriting (AU) program. Savvy loan reps will do a
“ﬁrst-review” and then, if desirable, suggest ways
that you can improve your ﬁnancial proﬁle.

ratios.

Calculating the Ratios
With the advent of automated underwriting (AU) by computer, many
loan reps and loan underwriters no longer calculate housing ratios directly. In fact, some newer reps wouldn’t know what to do with a loan
ratio even if you showed it to them. Nevertheless, qualifying ratios matter a great deal, only now the math is hidden in the automated underwriting program.
But make no mistake. If you understand and improve your qualifying
ratios, you will raise the odds for loan approval and increase the amount
the lender will loan you. Strong ratios may also help
you slice your interest rate and your mortgage insurLow ratios may
ance premiums (if any). Both the housing cost ratio
decrease your
and the total debt ratio give lenders a way to measure
whether your income looks like it’s large and deinterest rate and
pendable enough to safely cover your mortgage paydown payment.
ments, monthly debts, and other living expenses.
Housing Cost (Front) Ratio
(front) ratio with this formula:
Housing cost ratio =

where:

You can easily ﬁgure your housing cost

(P & I) + (T & I) + (MI) + (HOA)
Monthly gross income

P&I represents principal and interest (the basic monthly
mortgage payment).
T&I represents the amount you must pay monthly for property taxes and homeowners insurance.
MI represents the monthly mortgage insurance premium
you may have to pay if you put less than 20 percent down.
HOA represents the monthly amount you may have to pay
to a condominium or subdivision homeowners association.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

114

To keep things simple, let’s say that your household income (including anticipated rent collections) equals $7,000 a month. To buy the
property you want, you need a loan of $235,000. You decide to go for a
30-year, ﬁxed-rate loan at 7 percent interest. This loan will cost you
$1,563 per month (235   $6.65; see Table 8.1). Property taxes and
homeowners insurance on this property will total $400 per month. No
mortgage insurance applies, but you must pay the homeowners association $125 per month to maintain the community swimming pool, tennis
courts, and clubhouse. Here’s how to compute your housing cost ratio
for this example:
$1563 + 400 +125
$7000
$2088
=
$7000
= 0.298 or 29.8%

Housing cost ratio =

Because the lender your talking with has set a housing cost guideline ratio of 28 percent, your numbers look like they might work. So we
next turn to the total debt ratio.
Total Debt Ratio The total debt ratio begins with your housing costs
and then adds in monthly payments for all of your monthly payments
(other mortgages, credit cards, student loans, auto loans, etc.). At present, say your BMW hits you for a payment of $650 a month, the Taurus
another $280. Your credit card and department store account balances
total $8,000 and require a minimum payment of 5 percent of the outstanding balance per month ($400). Here are the ﬁgures:
Total debt ratio =

Housing costs + installment debt + revolving debt
Monthly gross income

$2088 + 650 + 250 + 400
$7000
$3388
=
$7000
= 0.484 or 48.4%
=

With this loan program, the lender would like to see a total debt ratio no
greater than 36 percent. Whoops. Looks like you’ve blown through the

Here’s How to Qualify

Table 8.1

115

Monthly Payment Required per $1,000 of Original Mortgage Balance

Interest (%)

Monthly Payment

Interest (%)

Monthly Payment

2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0

$3.95
4.21
4.49
4.77
5.07
5.37
5.67
5.99
6.32
6.63

7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0

$6.99
7.34
7.69
8.05
8.41
8.77
9.15
9.52
9.90
10.29

Note: Term = 30 years.

limits. But does this mean you won’t get the loan—or maybe you’ll have
to settle for a lesser amount? Not necessarily.
If your credit score (see Chapter 3) is high enough, your loan may
still get approved. If that doesn’t work, maybe you can increase your
qualifying income, reduce your monthly debt, or provide compensating
factors.

You Can Lift Your Qualifying Income
In the previous example, we assumed that your income totaled $7,000
per month. In the real world, ﬁguring your income presents a somewhat
greater challenge (and opportunity). For to calculate qualifying income—that speciﬁc income amount entered into the denominator of
your qualifying ratios—lenders evaluate a range of actual and potential
income from sources such as:
◆ Salary
◆ Hourly wages
◆ Overtime
◆ Bonuses
◆ Commissions
◆ Scheduled raises
◆ Alimony

◆ Social Security
◆ Unemployment insurance
◆ Self-employment
◆ Moonlighting/part-time job
◆ Tips
◆ Disability insurance
◆ Stock dividends

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

116

◆ Welfare/ADC
◆ Pension
◆ Tax-free income
◆ Child support

◆ Interest
◆ Consulting
◆ Rent collections
◆ Annuities

As you look through this list, you can see that for many borrowers,
no precise income ﬁgure can be calculated. Consider the entries for
overtime, bonuses, and commissions. Over a period of months or years,
these amounts could vary widely.
Or what about unemployment insurance payments? How could
someone who’s unemployed (or expects to become unemployed) ever
hope to get qualiﬁed for a mortgage? Why would income from this
source count? Well, I know a savvy loan rep who routinely gets unemployment insurance counted. His borrowers work during summer stock
theater for very good wages. Then during the off-season, they regularly
collect unemployment. So, their qualifying income includes both their
earnings from summer stock acting and their regular checks from the
government.
Regularity, Stability, Continuity Lenders will count any income that
you can show as stable, regular, and continuing. Usually, a two-year history
with a promising (realistic) future is enough to satisfy the lender. On the
other hand, what if during the past ﬁve years you’ve typically earned sales
commissions of $4,000 a month, but during the past eight months that income has jumped to $6,000 a month? Here, the loan rep or loan underwriter must make a judgment call—which you can inﬂuence. Show the
loan rep persuasive evidence why your more recent earnings should
weigh more heavily than those lower earnings of years past.
Or think about alimony and child support. You may hold a court
order that requires your ex-spouse to pay you $1,500 per month. But
your spouse displays a casual indifference to honoring this legal decree.
Sometimes you get paid. Sometimes you don’t. So,
what amount will the lender count as qualifying inYou can increase
come? Again, a judgment call that you can inﬂuence
your qualifying
according to how well you explain away your ex’s
past irresponsibility and provide assurances of fuincome.
ture compliance.
Anticipated Earnings Sometimes you can persuade a lender to accept anticipated earnings that may lack a past or a present. Say your

Here’s How to Qualify

117

spouse has just taken a new job in Topeka. You previously worked as a
teacher, but for family reasons, took leave for the past two years. Once
the family gets resettled in your new community, however, you plan to
return to full-time teaching. Will the lender count your future earnings?
With a good argument and evidence of intent, you probably can get at
least part of this potential income included. In fact, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac both offer dispensation for “trailing spouses.”
Recent college graduates (or recent graduates
of professional schools such as nursing, law, mediSometimes you
cine, business, or engineering) also can secure mortcan count future
gages without immediate past or present income or
employment. A contract for a new job may work to
income.
establish your qualifying income.
When Current Income Doesn’t Count For the past 12 years, you
worked as a master mechanic at the local Ford dealer. You earned $5,350
a month.Then, six months ago, you got hooked on Shaklee products.You
quit your job at Ford and became a Shaklee sales distributor. Business
was slow at ﬁrst, but during the past three months you’ve cleared close
to $25,000. Will this income qualify? Sorry, your newfound success
would not impress most lenders. They would tell you to reapply after
proving your Shaklee sales skills for another 18 to 24 months.

Maximize Your Qualifying Income

Use your artistic
skills. Paint the
lender a pleasing
picture.

To secure loan approval and to maximize borrowing
power, present your income history, current earnings, and future prospects as optimistically as possible. You must anticipate and effectively respond to
any negative signals that may cause the lender to
doubt the amount, stability, or continuing nature of
your income.

Overcome the Negatives If your earnings were lower last year only
because you went back to school to get your M.B.A. so you could advance in your job, make sure the loan rep knows it. If last year you
earned $60,000, but as of September 1 this year you’ve only taken in
$40,000, show the lender that your big earnings season runs from September to December. Provide evidence that typically you earn 40

118

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

percent of your commissions during the last three months of the year.
So, actually, you’re on track to outpace last year’s record.
If your income is complicated by self-employment earnings, prepare explanations. For truly complex situations involving important
amounts of money, enlist the aid of your accountant.
Potential problems, for example, include tax losses
Self-employment
offset by positive cash ﬂow, or strong business profits, yet small wage or salary draws from the business
income needs
(to minimize your personal income taxes). Many
more
run-of-the-mill loan reps can’t effectively understand
explanations.
these issues without guidance or persuasive input
from you.
Put Positives in Writing Award-winning credit explanations can
only sway hearts and minds when you put them on paper. Lenders follow this rule: “If it’s not in writing, it doesn’t exist.” Mortgage underwriters need CYA paperwork piled higher and deeper, just in case a loan
auditor investigates the ﬁles.
Nearly all lenders today monitor loan quality and data integrity
through internal audits. Without the paperwork to justify their loans, the
lender could run into trouble with regulators, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
HUD, or bank insurers. So if you want a lender to view your past, present,
and future income more favorably than it otherwise would, write out and
deliver your evidence—before the lender formally reviews your application. (Even when an AU system approves your loan application, a human
underwriter must still sign off on a loan commitment. You will be called
upon to deliver documents and explanations such as
tax returns, W-2s, 1099s, tenant leases, veriﬁcation of
Write out
employment, veriﬁcations of bank accounts, and
statements to explain credit derogatories. Without adpersuasive
equate support, the underwriter can reject a loan.
explanations.
Also, with good supporting evidence, an underwriter
can accept what AU has failed to approve.)

Reduce Your Disqualifying Debt
The ﬂip side of income is debt. High monthly payments can either block
your loan approval or, at a minimum, reduce the amount you can borrow.
From the list below, total your current monthly payments.

Here’s How to Qualify

◆ Car #1
◆ Car #2
◆ Car #3
◆ Motorcycle
◆ Jet ski
◆ Power boat
◆ Furniture
◆ Student loan(s)
◆ Appliances
◆ Credit card #1
◆ Credit card #2
◆ Credit card #3
◆ Credit card #4
◆ Medical bills

Total monthly debt repayments

119

◆ Alimony
◆ Child support
◆ Merchant account #1
◆ Merchant account #2
◆ Merchant account #3
◆ Judgments/liens
◆ Personal loans
◆ Mortgage #1
◆ Mortgage #2
◆ Mortgage #3
◆ Other
◆ Other
◆ Other

$

What to Count, What to Leave Out
To calculate total debt ratio, lenders usually divide your monthly payments into two types: (1) installment debt, which includes loans you’re
paying off such as autos, boats, medical bills, and student loans, and
(2) revolving (or open) accounts which include Visa, Mastercard, Amex
Optima, Home Depot, Texaco, and any other credit line that remains
open until you or your friendly creditor closes it.
Not All Payments Count Most lenders ignore payments for installment debts that are scheduled to be paid off within 6 to 10 months from
the date of your mortgage application. But if the lease on your auto is set
to end within a few months, you’re out of luck. Those payments still
count against you. The lender assumes (unless convinced otherwise)
that you will continue to incur this expense when you lease a new car to
replace the old one.
You do, though, get a break for qualifying when lenders look at
your revolving debt. Even if you regularly pay hundreds of dollars more
per month than your minimum payment(s) due, most lenders will only
count your payment as 5 percent of your outstanding balances. Or if
your minimum payment is less than 5 percent, lenders will count that
lower amount instead.

120

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

Prepare Far Ahead of Time Get your debt situation shaped up as
soon as you can. Not only will this ﬁscal ﬁtness program lift your qualifying ratios, it may also boost your credit scores. Here are some tips:
1. Consolidate bills. One loan consolidation payment of $280 a
month will hurt you less than four separate bill payments of
$125 each. However, don’t close three accounts and run one
up close to its credit limit. Credit scoring doesn’t like “high”
balances relative to credit limits.
2. Pay down debt. If your installment debt has only 11 or 12
months to go, prepay two or three payments. That pushes
those debts off the table and out of sight—under the rules followed by most lenders.
3. Pay off debt. If you can swing it, get rid of as much debt as
you can.
4. Avoid new debt. No matter how much you are tempted, do
not take on no new debt prior to applying for a mortgage.
Even if you can easily afford it, you’re better off waiting until
after you’ve been through closing.
These tips especially apply if your ratios are pushing against the
lender’s guideline total debt limits, if your credit score falls below, say,
700, if you’re requesting a low-down-payment loan (a loan-to-value ratio
of greater than 80 percent), or if you’re trying to qualify for a non-owneroccupied investment property.
A pint-sized debt load will help offset any warts in your credit
proﬁle.

Use Compensating Factors to Justify Higher Qualifying Ratios
No two borrowers are exactly alike. That’s why many lenders will bend
their approval guidelines when you give them prudent reasons to do so.
Compensating Factors Make the Difference Gordon Steinback,
an executive who works for the Mortgage Guarantee Insurance Corporation, says his ﬁrm “routinely approves borrowers who don’t meet
standard underwriting criteria.” Yet, as Steinback points out, “regrettably, too many borrowers never get beyond the application stage. This

Here’s How to Qualify

List all of the
reasons why you
will be able to pay
your loan on time,

121

happens because these borrowers don’t meet the
AU qualifying standards and are thoughtlessly
screened out prematurely by inexperienced loan
reps. Experience shows, however, that most
would-be borrowers can get approved for a loan if
only someone shows them how.”

every time.
Types of Compensating Factors What types of compensating factors might lenders consider? Virtually anything positive that reasonably
demonstrates you can make your monthly payments responsibly and
control your ﬁnances. Here are a dozen examples:
◆ You’ve been making rent payments that equal or exceed the

after-tax cost of your proposed mortgage payments.
◆ You have a good record of savings. You regularly spend less than

you earn and you use credit sparingly.
◆ You are situated on the fast track in your career or employment.

You have a good record of promotions and raises.
◆ For your age and occupation, you have a high net worth (cash

value life insurance, 401(k) retirement funds, stocks, bonds, savings account, other investment real estate).
◆ You have put aside more than adequate cash reserves to handle
unexpected ﬁnancial setbacks.
◆ You or your spouse will generate extra income through part-time
work, a second job, tips, bonuses, or overtime.
◆ You carry little or no monthly installment debt. This can work
well when your housing cost ratio exceeds its guideline, but
your total debt ratio falls within its preferred limits.
◆ You’ve been through a homebuying counseling program that
helps homebuyers develop a realistic budget. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac lenders give special deals to ﬁrst-time buyers who
complete these programs. Many only last four hours, and they’re
well worth the time.
◆ You’re making a down payment of 20 percent or larger.
◆ Your employer provides excellent beneﬁts: auto, cash reimbursement for a home ofﬁce, a superior health and dental insurance plan, large contributions to your retirement account.

122

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

◆ You earn an above-average income. Budget-conscious people

whose earnings exceed $4,000 or $5,000 a month often enjoy
the ﬁnancial ﬂexibility to devote more money to real estate than
typical qualifying ratios indicate.
◆ Your nonhousing living expenses are lower than average. You
would explain that you can afford higher mortgage payments because: (1) the property is energy efﬁcient; (2) you can walk to
work or just drive a short commute; (3) you have no costly vices
(smoking, drinking); (4) you spend conservatively: you backpack
for vacations, drive an unassuming car, and buy clothes at the
outlet stores; (5) you’re handy with tools so you can perform
your own property maintenance; or (6) your food costs are low
because you grow your own garden and enjoy all the fresh and
home-canned vegetables you can eat.
Put Your Compensating Factors in Writing After you’ve developed a list of reasons why you can afford the mortgage you want, put
your reasons in writing. Get supporting letters from your employer, minister, former landlords, clients, customers, or anyone else who can vouch
for your good character, creditworthiness, job performance, earnings potential, or personal responsibility. Sometimes, too, it’s a good idea to
write out a household budget. Deliver all of your evidence to the loan
underwriter. With good explanations, you’ll break through qualifying
guidelines that would deter or delay other ill-prepared investors.

The Application Itself Contains Many Clues to Your Integrity
Most lenders will carefully review your loan application. They search for
numerical discrepancies, missing information, gaps in dates, inconsistencies, and anything that smells ﬁshy. “Hmm,” the lender muses, “You say
you’ve been out of college only three years. But you show no debts for
student loans on your application and you report cash savings of
$25,000. Would you mind telling me how you managed that feat?”
Experienced loan reps and underwriters have examined thousands of
loan apps. Their eyebrows rise easily. If your life story evokes an air of mystery, don’t leave the loan rep in the dark. Provide ﬁrm evidence that you’re
traveling the straight and narrow. Even innocent lapses or discrepancies in
your application can spell trouble—if not satisfactorily explained.

Here’s How to Qualify

123

No Rigid Borrowing Limits Apply to Commercial Properties
As you’ve just learned, when you ﬁnance a 1–4 unit residential property
through a mortgage lender, the lender will run through your total ﬁnances to calculate whether your personal income is large enough to
cover all of your monthly expenses—including all
mortgage payments (existing and those for which
you are applying).
You may not need
In contrast, most lenders expect commercial
qualifying income
properties to pay for themselves. Commercial property includes all ofﬁce buildings, shopping centers,
to ﬁnance an
and apartment properties of ﬁve units or more. Ideapartment
ally, you will be able to use a commercial property’s
building.
rent collections to cover all of its operating expenses and mortgage payments.

An Eight-Unit Money Maker
I recently discovered an eight-unit property that is up for sale. This apartment building generates $40,800 a year in rents. The seller is asking
$245,000.2 Operating expenses (maintenance, property taxes, insurance, management, yard care, etc.) for the property total about $18,000
per year. After allowing, say, $3,000 per year for vacancy and collection
losses, an investor would still net (before mortgage payments) $19,000 a
year.
Even if you paid this seller’s full asking price of $245,000 and ﬁnanced 100 percent (no down payment), your annual mortgage payments would total just $16,700 (based on 30 years at 7 percent). Your
property would throw off a positive cash ﬂow of $2,750 a year—net of
all expenses and debt repayment. Because this property would pay for itself, many lenders (or sellers) would not particularly care how much (or
how little) you earned from your job. As long as you show that you are a
credible and creditworthy buyer, the amount of your personal earnings
would not play a major role in the lending decision.

2. I realize these numbers look absurdly low to Californians and residents of other high-cost areas.
That’s why I encourage you to invest elsewhere if prices where you live stand way out of reach.

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

124

No Cash, No Credit, No Experience
When I began buying properties, I was a third-year college student. I possessed no wealth, no credit record, and my only earned income came
from a part-time job. Nevertheless, by the time I had completed graduate
school, the income from my rental properties exceeded my job income
many times over. In fact, I owed $600,000 in real estate-related debt and
earned less than $20,000 a year.3

Are Such Deals Possible?
Are deals like these still available? Absolutely. They’re not as easy to ﬁnd
today—especially in high-priced cities—but the basic principle holds.
When you become a commercial investor, your borrowing power will
greatly exceed your personal qualifying power. I know a 43-year-old investor who earns $51,350 a year ($4,280 a month) from her job, yet
each month she pays $26,430 in mortgage payments. This investor consistently ﬁnances properties solely on the rental revenues she collects.

“Low” Income, Inexperienced Developers
As another example of borrowing way outside the bounds of one’s income, consider this project.
I’m currently working with an inexperienced development team
(an architect, lawyer, and building contractor) that is building a $40 million mixed-use residential/retail/ofﬁce project. Other than sweat equity
for personal (professional) services and some upfront incidental expenses for planning the project, none of the team
members is putting any signiﬁcant amount of his
Financing new
own money into the development. As to borrowing
power to ﬁnance construction of the center, the
development
lender (Wachovia Bank) primarily wants to see that
doesn’t require
the prelease and presale activity for the project proyour own money.
vides strong evidence that the center will generate
enough revenue to pay back the development loan.

3. These ﬁgures are presented in current (inﬂation-adjusted) dollars.

Here’s How to Qualify

125

Although this team of developers earns a combined professional income of around $300,000 a year, in the eyes of the lender this earned income will play no signiﬁcant role in its lending decision. When viewed
against a $40 million loan, personal earnings of $300,000 a year don’t
count for much. The potential revenue from the property will determine
the lender’s decision to ﬁnance (or withdraw) from
the project.
Wealthy investors
Indeed, Donald Trump doesn’t personally earn
enough in a year to cover even one month’s worth
rarely make loan
of expenses and mortgage payments on all the proppayments from
erties he owns. How does he do it? The same way
their personal
that you can. He buys, develops, or renovates propincomes.
erties that yield enough income to pay for themselves.

The Debt Coverage Ratio
Your lender will use a debt coverage ratio (DCR) to help ﬁgure out
whether a multiunit investment property will yield enough net operating income (NOI) to cover the debt service and still leave some margin
of safety.4 Lenders want to satisfy themselves that even if rent collections
fall or property expenses increase, you will still be able to make your
mortgage payments without dipping into your personal funds.
You can calculate the debt coverage ratio according to this formula:

Debt coverage income (DCR) =

Net operating income (NOI)
Annual debt service

An illustration: Let’s return to that eight-unit property. Plugging
in the relevant numbers, we calculate the debt coverage ratio as

DCR =

$19,000 (NOI)
$16,700 (mortgage payments)

DCR = 1.137, say 1.14

4. To investors, the term “debt service” means the same thing as mortgage payments.

126

HOW TO RAISE THE MONEY

Most mortgage lenders like to see a debt coverage ratio of at least 1.1, and preferably in the range
of 1.15 to 1.3. The higher this ratio, the better. The
see enough NOI to
more net income you collect relative to the amount
create a margin of
of your mortgage payments, the larger your margin
safety.
of safety.
Even though you’re a beginning investor, I
would encourage you to see what types of small income properties are available in your area.5 You will ﬁnd that these properties (typically 5 to 24 units) will usually give you more cash ﬂow and
higher debt coverage ratios than single-family rental houses. As a result,
you may be able to ﬁnance a larger loan on a more costly property. That
has certainly been my experience.
Lenders want to

5. You might also proﬁt by reading my book, Make Money with Small Income Properties (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003).

P A R T

THREE

How to Invest for
Maximum Gain

C H A P T E R

9

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or
Create Below-Market Deals
In real estate—unlike the stock market—you not only make money
when you sell, you can make money when you buy. In the stock market,
you can’t buy a stock for less than its market value. In real estate these
transactions occur every day. If the shares of General Motors are selling at $47 each, no investor
You can buy
would tell Merrill Lynch to try to ﬁnd a GM shareproperties at less
holder who will part with 100 shares at $40 each.
But if you want to buy a $250,000 house or apartthan their true
ment building for $200,000 to $225,000, it’s possivalue.
ble that you can locate a seller who will oblige you.

Why Properties Sell for Less (or More) than Their Market Value
To see why you can buy properties for less than they’re worth, you need
to dig deeply into the meaning of the term “market value.” Under market
value conditions, a property sale meets these ﬁve criteria:
1. Buyers and sellers are typically motivated. Neither is acting
under duress.
2. Buyers and sellers are well informed and knowledgeable
about the property and the market.

129

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

130

3. The marketing period and sales promotion efforts are sufﬁcient to reasonably inform potential buyers of the property’s
availability (no forced or rushed sales).
4. There are no special terms of ﬁnancing (e.g., very low down
payment, bargain price, below-market interest rate).
5. No out-of-the-ordinary sales concessions are made by either
the seller or the buyer (for instance, sellers are not permitted
to stay in the house rent-free for three to six months until
their under-construction new house is completed).
As you think through this description of market value, you will realize that owners who are in a hurry to sell may have to accept a price
lower than market value. Likewise, an owner-seller (FSBO) who doesn’t
know how to market and promote a property will not likely receive top
dollar. Or, say, the sellers live out of town and don’t have accurate information about recent sales prices. Or maybe the sellers don’t realize that
their property (or the neighborhood) is ripe for proﬁtable improvement.
In general, we can place those owners who will sell at a bargain price
into eight categories.

Owners in Distress
Every day property owners hit hard times. They are laid off from their
jobs, ﬁle for divorce, suffer accidents or illness, experience setbacks in
their business, and run into a freight train of other
problems. Any or all of these calamities can create
High pressure
ﬁnancial distress. For many of these people, their
only way out of a jam is to raise cash. If that means
forces sellers to
selling their property for “less than it’s worth,” then
accept less.
that’s what they’re willing to do. For these people
are not just selling a property, they are buying relief.
Under these circumstances, as long as the sellers believe they have
gained more from the sale than they’ve lost, it’s a win-win agreement for
both parties. If you are willing to help people cope with a predicament—as opposed to taking advantage of them—seek out distressed
owners. On occasion, they will give you the bargain price (or favorable
terms) you want.

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

131

The “Grass-Is-Greener” Sellers
One day Karla Lopez was sitting in her ofﬁce and in walked the executive vice president of her ﬁrm. “Karla,” she said,“Aaron Stein in the Denver branch just quit. If you want his district
manager’s job you can have it. We will pay you
Opportunities
$25,000 more a year plus a bonus. But you have to
be relocated and on the job within 30 days.”
elsewhere
“Do I want it?” Karla burst out. “Of course I
encourage sellers
want it. Hope for a promotion like this is why I’ve
to accept loss.
been working 75-hour weeks for these past four
years.”
Will Karla Insist on Top Dollar? Think about it. In this situation,
does Karla think,“Well, the ﬁrst thing I must do is put my house up for
sale and go for top dollar”? Hardly. More than likely Karla will be willing
to strike a deal with the ﬁrst buyer who gives her any type of offer she
can live with. Karla’s got her eyes on the greener grass of Denver. Optimistic about her career and facing a time deadline, ﬁrst and foremost,
Karla simply wants to get her home sold as quickly as possible.
Grass-is-greener sellers stand in contrast to the ﬁnancially distressed. Whereas distressed owners sell on bargain terms or price to relieve themselves of pain, grass-is-greener sellers are willing to accept a
less than market-value offer so they can quickly grab better opportunities that lie elsewhere.
Even Pros Give Bargains Sometimes On one of several occasions
where I have been a grass-is-greener seller, not only did I give my buyers
a slight break on price but, more important from their perspective, I let
them assume my below-market-rate ﬁrst mortgage and carried back an
unsecured note for virtually all of their down payment. On at least a
dozen occasions, I’ve bought from sellers who were eager to pursue better opportunities elsewhere. Each time, I negotiated a good (if not great)
price and favorable ﬁnancing.
If looking for distressed owners doesn’t appeal to you, turn your
search in the opposite direction: Sellers who want to graze in greener
pastures (especially under a time deadline) are frequently the easiest
people to work with and the most accommodating in price and terms.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

132

Stage-of-Life Sellers
When shopping for bargains, you also can ﬁnd good deals among stageof-life sellers. These sellers are typically people whose lifestyle now conﬂicts with their property. They may no longer enjoy keeping up a big
house or yard, collecting rent, or dealing with tenant complaints. They
may eagerly anticipate their move to that condo on
the fourteenth green at the Bayshore Country Club.
Sellers who are
Or perhaps these sellers would rather not go
through the trouble of updating and repairing their
eager to move to
current property. Whatever their reasons, stage-oftheir next stage of
life sellers are motivated to get on with their lives.
life often accept
In addition—and this circumstance makes
these
sellers good prospects for a bargain price or
less.
terms—stage-of-life sellers typically have accumulated large amounts of equity in their properties.
Plus, because they’re older, they have accumulated savings and don’t
need cash. Stage-of-life sellers can be ﬂexible. They don’t need to
squeeze every last penny out of their sale.
Good Prospects for OWC Given their ﬁnancial well-being, stage-oflife sellers make excellent candidates for some type of “owner will carry”
(OWC) ﬁnancing. Not only will OWC terms help them sell their property
more quickly, but an installment sale can also reduce or postpone the capital gain taxes that a cash sale might otherwise require. As another advantage, OWC ﬁnancing—even
Stage-of-life sellers
when offered at below-market rates—will bring the
will often give
sellers a higher return than they could earn in a savings account, certiﬁcate of deposit, or money market
owner ﬁnancing.
fund (or perhaps even stocks).
My Early Strategy As a college student who wanted to invest in real
estate, I sought out stage-of-life owners of rental houses and small apartment buildings. These people were tired of managing their properties.
Yet, at the same time, they liked a monthly income and didn’t want to
settle for the meager interest paid by banks or take on the risks of
stocks. They also didn’t want to sell their properties outright for cash
and get hit with a heavy tax bill for capital gains.
Their solution: Sell on easy OWC terms to an ambitious young person who was willing to accept the work of rental properties in exchange

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

133

for an opportunity to start building wealth through investment real estate. This technique remains valid today. Because properly selected, wellmanaged rentals will pay for themselves, an investor who is willing to
work may be able to draw on ambition and perseverance instead of a
large down payment, a high credit score, and strong qualifying income.
Seller Ignorance Some sellers underprice their properties because
they don’t know the recent prices at which similar properties have been
selling. I confess that as a seller, I have made this mistake of selling too
low because I was ignorant of the market.
In one particular case, I was living in Palo Alto,
California. The rental house I decided to sell was loSellers who are
cated in Dallas, Texas. A year earlier, the house had
out of touch with
been appraised for $110,000, which at the time of
the appraisal was about right. So I decided to ask
the market often
$125,000. I ﬁgured that price was high enough to
sell for less.
account for inﬂation and still leave room for negotiating.
The ﬁrst weekend the house went on the market, three offers came
in right at the asking price. Immediately, of course, I knew I had underpriced. What I didn’t know but soon learned was that during the year I’d
been away, home prices in that Dallas neighborhood had jumped 30 percent. After learning of my ignorance, I could have rejected all the offers
and raised my price. Or I could have put the buyers into a “bidding war.”
But I didn’t. I just decided to sell to the person with the cleanest offer
(no contingencies). I was making a good proﬁt; why get greedy?

Cranky Landlords
I love to buy from cranky landlords. These are the type of rental property
owners who still think they’re living in feudal times. These owners persistently battle their tenants. They complain, complain, complain. Eventually, they end up hating the
whole idea of investing in real estate. These owners
Cranky landlords
see landlording as nothing but trouble. They want
often become
out.
eager sellers who
At that point, they’re nearly always willing to
give
in
to a lowball offer in exchange for getting rid
will accept less.
of their perpetual headaches.

134

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

(Whoa, you say, “Is this what I’m getting myself into? Trouble,
headaches, and battles with tenants?” No, not at all. That’s because in
Chapter 18, you will learn the 12 secrets of successful landlording—
actually I even detest the term landlord.That title no longer ﬁts the modern, enlightened owner of rental properties.)

Preserve the Lender’s Image and Balance Sheet
Banks, government agencies (FHA, VA), and the government-chartered
mortgage companies such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac often become
“don’t wanters.” When their mortgage borrowers fail to pay back their
loans, these mortgage lenders often end up with foreclosures on their
books (called REOs, which stands for real estate owned).
Lenders Want to Mitigate Their Losses Once lenders take back a
property in foreclosure, they switch their thinking. They no longer focus
on making money. Instead, they want to get rid of these REOs on prices
or terms that will cut their losses. (Banks often name their REO departments “Loss Mitigation.”)
That’s where you come in. Because a pile of foreclosures hurts the
lender’s image with regulators and depresses its balance sheet with “reserves for bad debts,” lenders will frequently give investors good deals to
take these properties (or delinquent loans) off of their hands.
Multiple Investor Opportunities As you will see in Chapter 10,
when you learn how the total foreclosure process works in your state—
the foreclosure process is governed by state law—you can play and win
the foreclosure game with a variety of approaches. For beginning investors who are willing to put in the effort, lender foreclosures offer
great opportunities to snare below-market deals.

The Possibility-Impaired
Who are the possibility-impaired? This type of owner confuses his diamond in the rough with a lump of coal. These owners don’t see the potential that their property offers. Why? Several reasons explain this
inﬁrmity.

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

135

◆ The sellers are out of touch with what features buyers (renters)

want.
◆ The sellers lack the capacity to imagine and create.
◆ The sellers have lived with the property so long that they have

come to accept their property’s shortcomings.
◆ The sellers don’t know that the local zoning and building regula-

tions actually permit a higher and more proﬁtable use for the
property.
This short list does not even come close to exhausting the reasons
people miss the opportunities that lie before them. As the best-selling
author,Wayne Dyer, says,“You must believe it to see it.” Because the possibility-impaired don’t believe their property offers great potential, they
never even think to look.1

Don’t Dilly-Dally with Due Diligence
Although good deals go fast, don’t jump in before you’ve checked to see
whether there’s water in the pool. Always remember that not all bargainpriced properties represent good deals. You have scored a good deal
only if you can sell the property for substantially more than you have put
into it. Beware of underestimating ﬁx-up expenses. Beware of hidden defects. Beware of environmental problems (e.g., lead paint, underground
oil storage tanks, asbestos, contaminated well water). Beware of pouring
so much cash into improvements that you’ll have to overshoot the rent
level that tenants are willing and able to pay.
Always temper your eagerness to buy a bargain-priced property
with a thorough physical, ﬁnancial, market, and legal analysis. Especially
in cases of low- or nothing-down seller ﬁnancing, many beginning investors grab at a “great” deal without ﬁrst putting it under a magnifying
glass. Act quickly when you must. But the less you know about a property, the greater your risk.

1. For detailed ideas on how to create value with your properties, see Chapters 13 and 14 and my
book, Make Money with Fixer-Uppers, Renovations, and Rehabs (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2003).

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

136

The Disclosure Revolution
Most states now require certain types of sellers to complete a disclosure
statement that lists and explains all known problems or defects that may
plague a property. But even if your state doesn’t yet mandate seller disclosure, you still should obtain a disclosure form (most major realty ﬁrms
keep blank copies on hand) and ask the owners to ﬁll it out. In reviewing a completed disclosure statement, however, keep in mind the following ﬁve trouble points:
1. Sellers are not required to disclose facts or conditions of
which they are unaware.
2. Disclosure reveals the past. It does not guarantee the future.
By completing the statement, sellers do not warrant the condition of the property.
3. Many disclosure questions require somewhat subjective answers. Are playing children a neighborhood “noise” problem?
Is a planned street widening an “adverse” condition?
4. Disclosure statements may not require sellers to disclose
property defects that are readily observable.
5. Pay close attention to any owner (or agent) statements that
begin,“I believe,”“I think,”“as far as we know,” and other similar hedges. Don’t accept these answers as conclusive. Follow up with further inquiry or inspection.
Insist on
disclosure facts—
not mere
opinions.

Seller disclosure statements help alert you to
potential problems. But even so, independently
check out the property to satisfy yourself that you
really know what you are buying.

Excluded Income Properties
Many seller disclosure laws apply only to 1–4 unit owner-occupied
properties. If you’re buying an investor-owned property or an REO,
the law may not require the seller to ﬁll out a disclosure statement. If
the seller does refuse, offset your additional risk by scaling down the
top price you’re willing to pay. Also, toughen up your prepurchase
inspections.

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

Many states
exempt investor
properties from
their seller
disclosure statutes.

137

Additionally, when buying income properties,
verify rental income and operating expenses. Ask
the sellers to sign a statement whereby they swear
that the income and expense ﬁgures that they have
reported to you stand true. Beware of owners who
put friends, relatives, and employees into their buildings at inﬂated rent levels. These tenants don’t really
pay the rents stated (or if they do, they get kickbacks in cash or other beneﬁts), but their signed
leases sure look attractive to unsuspecting buyers.

How to Find Bargain Sellers
Okay, now you’re ready to start ﬁnding these potential bargain sellers.
Here are ﬁve broadly deﬁned techniques:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Networking
Newspapers and other publications
Cold calls directly to owners
Real estate agents
Information highway

Networking
Some time back I was leaving the country for several years and decided
to sell my house with a minimum of hassle. Coincidentally, the Ph.D. student club at the university where I was teaching was looking for a faculty member to host the upcoming faculty-student party. Aha, I thought,
what better way to expose my house to more than 100 people? So I volunteered. The week following the party, I received two offers and accepted one of them.
The buyers got a good price and excellent ﬁnancing. I avoided the
hassle of putting the property on the market and did not have to pay a
real estate commission. Everyone involved was satisﬁed.
This personal example shows the power of networking. What’s surprising, though, is that so few buyers and sellers consciously try to dis-

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

138

Whether buying or
selling, tell
everyone you
know.

cover each other through informal contacts among
friends, family, relatives, coworkers, church groups,
clubs, business associates, customers, parent-teacher
groups, and other types of acquaintances. So don’t
keep your search a secret. Tell everyone you know.
Describe what you’re looking for. Why search alone
when you can enlist hundreds of others?

Newspapers and Other Publications
When most people look for real estate, they browse the real estate classiﬁeds with a highlighter, call owners or Realtors, get basic information,
and, when something sounds promising, set up an appointment. While
this method can work reasonably well, it also can fail for two reasons:
(1) if a property isn’t advertised, you won’t learn about it, and (2) if the
ad for a property you might be interested in is not written effectively,
you may pass it by without serious notice.
Try Running Your Own Ads To at least partially overcome these
drawbacks, run your own advertisement in the “wanted to buy” column.
When you describe the type of property and terms that you’re looking
for, you invite serious sellers to contact you. When I began buying real
estate, I used this technique to locate about 30 percent of the properties
I bought.
As another way to use the newspaper, read through the “houses for
rent,”“condos for rent,” and “apartments for rent” ads. Not only will this
research help you gauge rent levels, often you’ll see properties advertised as “lease-option” or “for rent or sale.”These kinds of ads generally indicate a ﬂexible seller.
Look Beyond the Classiﬁeds To search for potential bargain sellers in the newspaper, go beyond the classiﬁed real estate ads. Locate
names of potential sellers from public notices: births, divorces, deaths,
bankruptcies, foreclosures, or marriages. Each of these events can trigger the need to quickly sell real estate. If you contact these owners (or
their heirs) before they have listed with a sales agent, you stand a fair
chance of buying at a bargain price. (In addition, you might subscribe
to the “default” or “foreclosure” lists and newsletters published in your
area.)

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

139

Cold Calls Directly to Owners
To learn successful cold-calling, follow the techniques of Realtors. Most
successful real estate agents develop listing farms. A listing farm represents a neighborhood or other geographic area that an agent consistently cultivates to ﬁnd sellers who will list their properties for sale with
that agent. Agents who cold-call typically telephone property owners
with names gathered from a crisscross directory, walk the neighborhood, talk to residents, circulate ﬂyers by mail or doorknob hangers, and
take part in neighborhood or community-sponsored events. By cultivating a farm, an agent hopes to become well known in the area. An agent
positions himself or herself to be the ﬁrst person property owners think
of when they contemplate a sale.
Take a lesson out of the real estate agent’s playbook. Cultivate a
farm in the neighborhoods or communities where you would like to
buy. Circulate a ﬂyer, for example, that reads:
Before you list your home for sale, please call me. I am looking
to buy a property in this neighborhood directly from the owners. Let’s see if we can sit down together and work out an
agreement that will beneﬁt both of us.
Cultivate your
farm.

When property owners learn how they can
save time, effort, and money selling direct, they
may be willing to offer you a favorable price or
terms.

Vacant Houses and Out-of-the-Area Owners Your farm area will include some properties (vacant or tenant-occupied) that are owned by
people who do not live in the neighborhood. These owners may not see
your ﬂyers, nor will they be listed in a crisscross directory. To learn how
to reach these potential sellers, ask neighbors of nearby properties or
talk directly with the tenants who live in the property.
If this research doesn’t reveal the owners’
names and addresses, you can next contact the
county property tax assessor’s ofﬁce. There you can
Often out-of-area
learn where and to whom the property tax stateowners are
ments are mailed. It’s not unusual to ﬁnd that out-ofthe-area property owners are actually “sleeping
sleeping sellers.
sellers.” That is, they would like to sell, but haven’t

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

140

awoken to that fact. With luck and perseverance, you could become
their alarm clock.
Expired (or About to Expire) Listings For any of a number of reasons, many properties listed with real estate agents do not sell during
their original listing period. When this situation occurs, the listing agent
will try to get the owners to relist with his or her ﬁrm. And quite likely,
agents from other brokerage ﬁrms also will approach the sellers. However, here’s what you can do to cut them off at the pass and perhaps
arrange a bargain purchase.
When you notice a listed property that looks like it might ﬁt your
requirements, do not call the agent. Do not call or
stop by to talk to the owners. Instead write the
Ask sellers to
owners a letter stating the price and terms that you
contact you after
would consider paying. Then ask the owners to contact you after their listing has expired. (If a seller
their listing has
goes behind his agent’s back and arranges a sale
expired.
while the property is listed, the owner is legally obligated to pay the sales commission.)
An example: Sellers have listed their property at its market value
of $200,000. The listing contract sets a 6 percent sales commission. The
sellers have told themselves that they will accept nothing less than
$192,500, which means that after selling expenses they would receive
around $180,000. You offer $175,000. Would the sellers accept your
offer? Or would they relist, postpone their move, and hold out for $5,000
to $10,000 more?
It would depend on the sellers’ ﬁnances, their reason for moving,
and any other pressures they may face. But you can see that even though
your offer is low relative to the market value of the property, your price
gives the sellers almost as much as they could expect if their agent found
them a buyer. (Naturally, your letter would not formally commit you to
the purchase. It would merely state the price or terms that you have in
mind.)

Real Estate Agents
Do not conclude from the above technique that you should never use a
real estate agent to help you ﬁnd bargain-priced investment properties.
A top agent can assist you in many ways. However, agents do deserve to

Twenty-Seven Ways to Find or Create Below-Market Deals

Real estate agents
can provide you
many valuable
services.

141

be paid for their services. So if you’re planning to
buy at a bargain price or buy on bargain terms (especially with low- or no-down-payment ﬁnancing),
where’s the agent’s fee going to come from? To pursue the best deal possible, at times you may have to
forgo an agent’s services and do your own legwork.

Cruise the Information Highway
Today’s investors not only cruise neighborhoods, they also cruise the Internet to look for properties. Thousands of websites now list properties
for sale. Property buyers (or browsers) can access the Realtor’s Multiple
Listing Service (MLS) through Realtor.com.
There is also a budding entrepreneurial industry that is accumulating specialized listings of everything from foreclosures to distressed
properties to FSBOs. Going online you can locate investors looking for money—or money looking for
Shop and compare
properties.
Virtually all real estate information that in the
properties on the
past has been available from Realtors, public
Internet.
records, newspaper ads, newsletters, and other
sources is now accessible on the Internet. Nobody
today knows exactly where technology will lead us tomorrow. But electronic shopping for real estate (and mortgages) has made the MLS book
as obsolete as a slide rule. (For a listing of websites useful to real estate
investors, see the Internet Appendix. For a quick check of techniques
you can use to ﬁnd owners who will sell at a bargain price, see Box 9.1.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Box 9.1

Advertise “I buy properties” in the real estate classiﬁeds.
Advertise on your car or truck with a magnetic “I buy properties” sign.
Make your car or truck a mobile billboard. Paint it with an “I
buy houses” advertising message.
Mail out “I buy houses” postcards to owners in your farm area.
Mail out “I buy houses” postcards or letters to owners who are
being foreclosed.
(continued)

Quick Check List to Find Bargains

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

142

(Continued)
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Advertise your property needs to real estate agents.
Contact attorneys (real estate, divorce, bankruptcy, estate, tax
settlement specialists).
Contact yard care companies that maintain properties for
lenders after the owners have abandoned them.
Network with friends, family, acquaintances.
Agree to pay bird-dog fees to anyone who refers you to a great
buy.
Approach other investors who have just bought a property at a
foreclosure sale. They may be willing to quick-ﬂip for a small
proﬁt.
Contact the mortgage loss mitigation (REO) departments of
mortgage lenders.
Follow closely the foreclosure postings.
Keep your eye out for properties in disrepair, especially those
that are vacant or occupied by renters.
Contact out-of-town owners of properties in disrepair.
Get to know real estate agents who specialize in distress sales,
foreclosures, and REOs. These types of agents frequently run
ads publicizing their specialty—or you can just notice which
agents tend to run ads for distressed properties such as HUD
homes.

For a more extensive discussion of these and other similar techniques, see Peter Conti and
David Finkel, Making Big Money Investing in Foreclosures (Chicago: Dearborn, 2003),
pp. 91–132.

Box 9.1

Quick Check List to Find Bargains (Continued)

C H A P T E R

10

Make Money with Foreclosures
and REOs
If you’ve watched some of the real estate infomercials, you might believe
that it’s easy to buy a property at a foreclosure auction for just pennies
on the dollar—then quickly resell that property for a large and easy
windfall gain. Not true.

The Stages of Foreclosure
In fact, buying foreclosures “on the courthouse steps”represents just one
type of foreclosure possibility. And that widely promoted approach entails big risks and uncertain proﬁts. Consequently, experienced and successful investors usually buy before or after a foreclosure auction—not
during. As a beginner, that, too, is where you should place your efforts.

Owner’s Default (the First Stage)
When property owners fail to pay their mortgage payments, at ﬁrst their
lender will encourage, coerce, or threaten them through “reminder” letters, telephone calls, or credit counseling. If those efforts don’t produce
results, the lender’s lawyers take over. Talking tough, the lawyers usually
threaten foreclosure and warn the property owners to either pay up or
face serious trouble.
143

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

144

Lenders favor loan
workouts over
foreclosure.

Near-record
numbers of
property owners
need loan
workouts.

Typically, lenders may continue their loan
workout efforts for anywhere from one to six
months, or maybe longer. In contrast to the late
1980s and early 1990s, most lenders today do tend
to give borrowers generous opportunity to reinstate
or even reﬁnance their delinquent mortgages.
As a result, fewer properties now end up at
foreclosure sales—especially compared with the
tidal wave of foreclosures that ﬂooded the market
10 to 15 years ago. Even so, lenders will get the keys
to more than 100,000 properties this year. And the
number of borrowers who fall behind in their payments (and are in need of a loan workout) exceeds 2
million people a year. So, even though pickings
aren’t as good as they once were, beginning investors can still locate great foreclosure buys.

Filing Legal Notice
When a lender does ﬁnally give up on a workout, its lawyers either ﬁle a
legal “notice of default” or a “lawsuit to foreclose” (depending on the
state). The lender then posts notice of this suit on the Internet and in
newspapers. These postings tell the property owners, any other parties
who may have legal claims against the owners or their property, and the
public in general that legal action is moving forward to force a sale of the
property.

The Foreclosure Sale (the Second Stage)
Eventually, when the defaulting borrowers run out of time, legal defenses, or delaying maneuvers, the foreclosure sale date arrives. At this
point, the court trustee auctions the property to the
highest cash bidder.
On occasion, a real estate investor (a forecloLenders often win
sure speculator) submits the winning bid. More
the bid at the
likely, though, the lender who has forced the foreclosure sale bids, say, one dollar more than the
foreclosure sale.
amount of its unpaid claims (mortgage balance, late

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

145

fees, accrued interest, attorney fees, foreclosure costs) and walks away
with a “sheriff’s” deed to the property. From then on until the lender
sells the property, that property remains on the lender’s books as real estate owned—an REO.

Lender’s Don’t Want REOs (the Third Stage)
The most important thing to know concerning foreclosure should be
written in capital letters: LENDERS DO NOT WANT TO OWN FORECLOSED REAL ESTATE. For lenders—including such institutions as the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac—holding onto an REO that they
have acquired through foreclosure rarely seems like a good idea. No matter how much potential the property offers, lenders who own REOs
want to sell quickly. For you, their desire to sell quickly may mean their
loss and your gain.
◆ ◆ ◆

In sum, the three stages of the foreclosure process offers you these
possibilities to gain a bargain price or bargain terms:
1.
2.
3.

You can negotiate with the distressed property owners and, if
necessary, the foreclosing lender.
You can bid at the foreclosure auction.
You can negotiate and buy directly from the lender or its insuring agency (FHA, VA, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac) that owns
the property as an REO.

Approach Owners with Empathy: Step One
There’s no magic system that you can use to buy a property from owners facing foreclosure. These owners are plagued with ﬁnancial troubles,
personal anguish, and indecisiveness. In addition, they probably have
been attacked by innumerable foreclosure sharks, speculators, bank
lawyers, and recent attendees of “get-rich-quick” foreclosure seminars.
These owners are living with public shame. For all of these reasons and
more, they are not easy people to deal with.

146

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Yet when you develop a sensitive, empathetic, problem-solving
approach with people suffering foreclosure, you may be able to come
up with a win-win agreement. Just keep in mind that more than likely
you won’t be the only investor who pays them a visit. A “Here’s my
offer—take it or leave it” approach will undoubtedly antagonize owners. This approach will not favorably distinguish you from a dozen
other potential foreclosure buyers (sharks). So develop your offer and negotiations to preserve what
little may be left of the owner’s dignity and self“Take it or leave it”
esteem.
rarely works in
Perhaps you can share personal information
negotiations with
about setbacks you have lived through. Above all,
distressed owners.
emphasize win-win outcomes. Dire straits or not, no
one wants their property stolen from them.

Meet the Property Owners
When you visit with the property owners, you will try to make a good
buy. But also, approach the troubled owners with aid that will end their
distress. When everything goes right, the owners will receive cash for
some of their equity, their credit will be salvaged, and you will acquire
title to the property.
Here are several approaches you can use to open negotiations with
an owner in foreclosure:
“If you’ll allow me to make a complete ﬁnancial analysis of the
property, I can be back within 24 hours with a ﬁrm offer that
might solve your current dilemma.
“I would like to ﬁgure a way to give you some cash for
your equity, which you will otherwise lose in a foreclosure
sale. By working with me you can save your credit, leave this
property ﬁnancially better off, and start your life over.
“May I review the loan documents on your home? Do
you have a copy of the mortgage and the loan payment
record?”
With an empathetic, win-win manner, you will more often succeed
where the foreclosure sharks fail.

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

147

Don’t Fear Run-Down Properties
Do not be put off by cosmetic damage to the house as long as the house
is structurally sound. A run-down house usually gives you more chance
to proﬁt. In fact, the more cosmetically run-down, the better. Every easily
curable defect offers proﬁtable opportunity to the shrewd distressedproperty investor and renovator.
Thoroughly check out the entire property.
Carefully analyze it. Then accurately evaluate the
Cosmetic ﬁxers
selling price that you could get after you’ve completed your ﬁx-up work. If you’ve worked the numoffer big potential
bers and the total costs of purchase and ﬁx-up
for proﬁt.
exceed your probable resale value, don’t necessarily
abandon the project. Go back to the troubled
owner (or mortgage lender) and reopen negotiations. Point out that you
must make a reasonable proﬁt. If still you’re unable to arrive at a good
deal, then look elsewhere.

Vacant Houses
To discover a vacant house in foreclosure means to discover both a problem and an opportunity. It’s a problem because you may have to do
some detective work to locate the owners. Unless the owners have purposely tried to disappear, though, you can probably locate them in one of
the following ﬁve ways:
1. Contact nearby neighbors to learn the owners’ whereabouts,
or the names of friends or family who would know.
2. Call the owners’ telephone number and see if you get a “number changed” message.
3. Ask the post ofﬁce to provide the owners’ forwarding address.
4. Find out where the owners were employed and ask coworkers.
5. Contact the school that the owners’ children attended and ask
where their school records were sent. (However, with today’s
concerns about privacy, I’ve found that many school personnel will no longer give out school transfer information.)

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

148

After you locate the owners comes opportunity.
Because they have abandoned the property, they
probably aren’t entertaining any pie-in-the-sky hopes
abandoned
for a sale at an inﬂated price. At this point, they may
properties seldom
view any offer you make them as “found money.”
In some cases, you will learn that the owners
hold out for top
have
split up and gone their separate ways. This sitdollar.
uation raises another problem: Especially in hostile
separations, working out an agreement with one
owner in the belief that you can convince the other to go along often
proves futile. To avoid this difﬁculty, negotiate with all owners simultaneously—or don’t negotiate at all, unless you’re just trying to sharpen
your skills and you won’t mind failing to close the deal.
Owners of

Sometimes Losing Less Is Winning
If the property goes to the foreclosure sale, more often than not, the
lender and the property owners will lose money. But think what happens when all parties agree to work with each other, rather than against
each other. You can create an outcome where everyone walks away better off. Maybe they receive less than they hoped for, certainly less than
they were theoretically entitled to, but far more than they could expect
from a bidder at a foreclosure auction.

Some Investors Do Proﬁt from the Foreclosure Auction: Step Two
Although foreclosure sales typically lose money for lenders, lienholders,
and property owners, savvy bidders can turn these sales into big proﬁts.
But it’s not easy. Bidding blind doesn’t work. You have to do your homework.

Why Foreclosures Sell for Less than Market Value
A typical foreclosed property does sell at a price less than its market
value. Why? Because foreclosure auctions don’t come close to meeting
the criteria of a market value transaction (see Box 10.1).

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

Market Value Sale
No seller or buyer duress
Buyer and seller well informed
60 to 120 day marketing period
Financing on typical terms
Owners agree to move
Marketable title
Warranty deed
Seller disclosures
Close inspection of physical condition
Yard sign
“Homes for sale” ads
Box 10.1

149

Foreclosure Auction
Forced sale
Scarce information
Five minutes or less selling time
Spot cash (or within 24 hours)
Owners or tenants may have to
be evicted
No title guarantees
Sheriff’s (or trustee) deed
No seller disclosures
No physical inspection
Rarely a yard sign
Legal notice listing

Characteristics of a Foreclosure Sale

As you can see, foreclosure auctions seem purposely designed to
yield the lowest possible sales price. They take place under conditions
that violate all principles of effective marketing.

Make the Puny Sales Efforts Work for You
For most would-be buyers, the potential risk, expense, and aggravation of
foreclosure sales deter them from even showing up to bid. When you
consider the lame marketing efforts, the adverse conditions of sale, and
the potential owner (tenant) eviction problem, is it any wonder that
foreclosed properties deserve to sell at a “fraction of their market value”?
Indeed, you might look at the foreclosure sales process and say,
“Too many potential problems. No way do I want to take those kinds of
risks. Besides, how could I ever come up with so
much cash on short notice?” Clearly, that’s the attitude of the great majority of real estate investors. It
Great uncertainty
explains why at most sales the foreclosing lender
produces low sales
“wins”the bid at a price equal to (or slightly above)
the accumulated balance on the borrower’s outprices.
standing debt.

150

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Overcome the Risks of Bidding
RISK looms large to block your path to foreclosure sale proﬁts. So the
key to savvy bidding lies in knowing as much about the property as due
diligence demands.
How can you get this information? First, meet with the property
owners to talk over possibilities for working out a deal before foreclosure. Even when those discussions end without agreement, you’ve still
been able to learn about the property (market value, ﬁx-up needs, improvement opportunities), the neighborhood, and the owner’s intentions. This step alone puts you way ahead of the game.
Second, quickly research liens against the title to the property at
the courthouse—or online. You want to list every claim or judgment
that you will have to satisfy to clear title. If you decide to pursue the
property, you will need to verify the quality of the title with a lawyer or
title insurer. I have usually found the clerical workers at the courthouse helpful when I’m unfamiliar with the record-ﬁling procedures in
an area.

How to Arrange Financing
After you gather information to manage the risks of buying at foreclosure, you still face the problem of ﬁnancing. How are you going to get
the cash to close the sale? If you lack wealth or credit, you’re probably
out of luck. Unless you bring in a money partner you really can’t play the
foreclosure game.
However, if you can even temporarily raise cash—such as a home
equity loan, credit card cash advances, selling (or borrowing against)
stocks, or maybe a signature loan—you can bid at a foreclosure auction.
Then, after the foreclosure paperwork clears, you can place an interim or
longer-term mortgage loan against the property and pay off your shortterm creditors.
Established investors who routinely buy foreclosed properties generally establish a line of perRaise the cash to
sonal credit at a bank. Then they can draw on the
bid via partners or
money whenever they need it. Or they maintain
cash balances (money market funds) in amounts sufshort-term credit.
ﬁcient to cover their usual buying patterns.

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

151

The Foreclosure Sale: Summing Up
If you are willing to learn the foreclosure game (as it’s played in your
local area), do your homework on properties, and manage your risks, you
can build proﬁts quickly. You can buy properties at foreclosure auctions
“for a fraction of their market value.”Your challenge is to learn which of
these properties meet the test of a true bargain—and which ones to
avoid because they carry severe risks or expensive problems.

The Beneﬁts of Buying REOs: Step Three
You can say one thing for certain about an REO: That lender wants to sell
the property as quickly as possible. Mortgage lenders like to make loans
and collect monthly payments. They do not like to own and manage
properties. As a result, they often grant buyers of their REOs a bargain
price, favorable terms such as low or no closing costs, below-market interest rates, and low down payments, or even some combination of all of
these beneﬁts.
If the property needs ﬁx-up work that the lenders would prefer not
to remedy, they may accept offers at deep discounts from market value.
Just as important, prior to closing the sale of their REOs, lenders normally clean up title problems, evict unauthorized occupants, and bring
all past-due property tax payments and assessments up to date. Some
lenders, too, permit buyers to write offers subject to an appraisal or professional inspection (contingency clauses).

Safer than Buying at the Foreclosure Sale
Buying an REO directly from a lender typically presents no more risk
than buying directly from any other property owner.1 Normally, you can
1. Several exceptions might include: (1) states where the foreclosed owners may have a right of
redemption; (2) if the foreclosed owners still retain some legal right to challenge the validity of the
foreclosure sale; or (3) if a bankruptcy trustee or the Internal Revenue Service (tax lien) is entitled
to bring the property within their powers. Rarely would any of these potential claims be worth
losing sleep over. But prior to closing an REO purchase, you might want to run these issues by
legal counsel.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

152

buy an REO much more safely than you could have bought the same
property at its foreclosure sale. Depending on the lender’s motivation,
its internal policies and procedures, and the property loan-to-value ratio
(LTV) at the time of the foreclosure sale, you might even be able to buy
at a price lower than market value.

Why a Lower Price?
Let’s say the market value of a property at the time of its foreclosure sale
was $165,000. The lender’s claims against the property totaled
$160,000. To win the property away from the lender, you would have
had to bid more than $160,000—a price that’s too high to yield a proﬁt.
However, once the lender owns the property
and tallies its expected holding costs, Realtor’s commission, and the risks of seeing the (probably) vaIt costs lenders big
cant property vandalized, it may decide to cut its
money to hold on
losses. It may accept an offer from you within the
range of $140,000 to $150,000 (especially if you
to their REOs.
offer cash, which you may borrow from some other
mortgage lender).
In desperate times REO lenders may turn to mass marketing and
highly advertised public auctions to unload their REOs. In stable to
strong markets, they generally (but not always) play it low key. If it can
be avoided, no lender wants to publicize the fact that it’s “throwing
down-on-their-luck families out of their homes.” So, absent tough times
and mass advertising, you can ﬁnd REOs in three different ways:
◆ Follow up after a foreclosure sale.
◆ Cold-call lender REO personnel.
◆ Locate Realtors who typically get REO listings.

Follow Up After Foreclosure
You can easily learn of lender REOs by attending foreclosure auctions.
When a lender casts a top bid for a property in which you’re interested,
buttonhole the bidder and start talking business. Or try to schedule an
appointment to see the ofﬁcer who takes charge of the management and

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

153

disposition of REOs. When you show the lender
how your bargain offer will actually save, perhaps
even make the bank money, you’ll be on your way to
with a lender
closing a deal.
immediately after
Beware of the stall. Nearly every ﬁnancial instithe foreclosure
tution is run by standard operating procedures,
management committees, and other precautionary
sale.
rules that frequently work against sensible decisions. If you run into a bureaucratic stonewall, you
must persevere. The reward of following through doesn’t just lie in getting a good deal on a property now. More important, you will build personal relationships that will open the bank’s doors for you in future
transactions.
Open discussions

Cold-Call REO (Loss Mitigation) Personnel
All mortgage lenders experience at least a few borrower defaults. No
one has yet designed a foolproof system for predicting which loan applicants will fail to pay. It follows, then, that at one time or another all mortgage lenders must end up with REOs—even if eventually they pass them
along to HUD,VA, Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac.
Sometimes, too, lenders pick up REOs without going through foreclosure. During the last real estate downturn, many lenders would open
their morning mail to ﬁnd the keys to a house, a deed, and a note from
the distressed owners saying,“We’re out of here. It’s your problem now.”
To ﬁnd REOs that lenders have acquired through foreclosure or
“deed-in-lieu” transfers, you can cold-call mortgage lenders. You might
ask for a list of their REOs. This technique, though, seldom turns up
much. For various reasons, lenders may keep a tight hold on this information. Nevertheless, it doesn’t cost to ask.
Until you establish relationships with REO personnel, you may ﬁnd the following approach works
better: Rather than ask for a complete list of REOs,
Cold-calling
narrow your focus. Tell lenders what you’re speciﬁlenders for REOs
cally looking for in terms of location, size, price
requires
range, ﬂoor plan, condition, or other features. In that
way, a lender can answer your request without dispersistence.
closing the full number of REOs within its inventory.

154

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Locate Specialty Realtors
Many mortgage lenders avoid selling directly to REO investors (though
they do make exceptions) for two reasons: (1) as mentioned, they don’t
like the unfavorable publicity, and (2) they want to promote good relations with Realtors.2 Because most mortgage lenders expect Realtors to
bring them new loan business, these same lenders can’t then turn
around and become FSBO (for sale by owner) dealers. “You scratch my
back and I’ll scratch yours” sets the rules in business.
As one part of your efforts to ﬁnd REOs, cultivate relationships with
Realtors who specialize in this market. (In fact, HUD,VA, Fannie Mae, and
Freddie Mac almost always sell their REOs through Realtors.) In most
cities, you can easily ﬁnd REO specialists by looking through newspaper
classiﬁed real estate ads.
Hire a Real Pro Once you have identiﬁed several foreclosure specialists, give each one a call. Learn their backgrounds. Do they only dabble
in the ﬁeld of REOs and foreclosures? Or do they make this ﬁeld their
full-time business? When I recently telephoned REO specialist John
Huguenard, for example, he talked with me for an
hour and a half about property availability, detailed
When searching
ﬁnancing and purchase procedures, hot areas of
town, rehab potential, estimating repair costs, portfor REOs, talk with
folio lenders, strategies for buying and managing
an REO specialist.
properties as well as selecting tenants, and a dozen
other related topics.
At one point during our conversation, he asked,“I’ll bet you haven’t
talked to any other agents who know as much as I do about REOs and
foreclosures, have you? I’ve been doing this 23 years. Last year, I sold 90
houses and rehabbed 16 others for my own account.” John was right. I
hadn’t.
Beware of False Experts John’s the kind of real estate professional
you want to ﬁnd. Although many realty agents claim expertise in REOs
and foreclosures—“Sure, I can do that for you”—only a few make it their
prime activity, day in and day out, year after year. When you work with an

2. Also, most lenders don’t want to waste time with all of those investor “wannabes” who have
just read a “nothing down” book or “graduated” from a foreclosure guru’s seminar.

Make Money with Foreclosures and REOs

155

agent who’s really in the know, you won’t have to do your own legwork
and door knocking. Your agent will screen properties as soon as—if not
before—they come onto the market. You will then be notiﬁed immediately.
Plus, specialty agents with in-depth knowledge also will stay on top
of the ﬁnance plans that portfolio, government, and conventional
lenders are offering to home buyers and investors. (Again, for example,
John Huguenard knew of portfolio lenders doing 100 percent LTV investor loans for investor acquisition and rehab.)
Avoid the foreclosure dabblers. Work with a real pro, someone who
knows all of the current rules, regulations, and operating procedures.
HUD, VA, Fannie, and Freddie Won’t Sell Direct to Buyers No
matter what approach to acquiring REOs and foreclosures you choose to
follow, you will beneﬁt by talking with realty pros who make the business a career. As noted earlier, though, if you buy an REO from HUD,VA,
Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac, you must process your offer through a
lender-authorized real estate agent. Only in certain exceptional circumstances would any of these organizations negotiate with you directly.
Your REO specialist will know all of the ins and outs necessary to deal
with these agencies and ﬁrms.

C H A P T E R

11

More Sources of Bargains

You may think that we’ve exhausted the possibilities for ﬁnding bargain
deals. But no. You’ve got at least 11 more sources of bargains.

Federal Government Auctions
Each year agencies of the federal government (in addition to HUD and the
VA) sell all types of seized and surplus real estate including homes, apartment complexes, ofﬁce buildings, ranches, and vacant and developed land.
Among the most active sellers are the Internal Revenue Service (IRS),
General Services Administration (GSA), and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC). On occasion, you can also ﬁnd properties offered by
the Small Business Administration (SBA). Although space here doesn’t permit full discussion of each of these agencies, you can locate their properties and sales procedures at the following websites:
Internal Revenue Service at www.treas.gov/auctions/irs
General Services Administration at http://propertydisposal.gsa.
gov/propforsale
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation at www.fdic.gov/buying/
owned/real/index
Small Business Administration at http://app1.sba.gov/pfsales/dsp
156

More Sources of Bargains

157

Sheriff Sales
In addition to foreclosures, you might want to follow sheriff sales or other
legally mandated involuntary property sales. These sales may result from
property tax liens, civil lawsuit judgments, and bankruptcy creditors.
Because of the local nature of these types of forced sales, I can’t go
into the details that relate to speciﬁc sales procedures or the relative possibilities for ﬁnding bargain prices. I can only say,“It all depends.”Yet if your
goal is to leave no stone unturned in your attempt to locate good deals, talk
with real estate lawyers, courthouse ofﬁcials, foreclosure speculators, and
others who are in the know about these types of sales. Because these sales
take place under less than ideal marketing methods, it’s only natural to expect selling prices that fall substantially below a property’s market value.

Buy from Foreclosure Speculators
Another way to proﬁt from foreclosure and forced sale auctions without
actually bidding is to buy from a winning bidder shortly after the foreclosure sale.
Say a foreclosure speculator puts in a winning bid of $145,000 on a
property that seems to have a market value of $195,000 if it were ﬁxed
up and marketed effectively. After the auction, you offer the speculator
$170,000 (or whatever). To minimize risk, you attach several contingencies to your offer that permit you to get the property thoroughly inspected, evict any holdover owners or tenants, clear
up title problems, seek title insurance, and arrange
Ask a speculator to
ﬁnancing. If the property checks out, the sale closes
and the speculator makes a quick $25,000 (more or
ﬂip you a property
less). You get the property at a discount without the
at a wholesale
costly surprises that can turn a superﬁcially promisprice.
ing foreclosure buy into a big loss.

Probate and Estate Sales
Probate and estate sales present another potential source of bargain
properties. When owners of properties die, their property may be sold

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

158

to satisfy the deceased’s mortgagee and other creditors. Even when the
deceased leaves sufﬁcient wealth in cash to satisfy all claims against the
estate, heirs still normally prefer to sell the property rather than retain
ownership.

Probate
To buy a property through probate, generally you submit a bid through
the estate’s administrator (usually a lawyer) or executor. Then all bids are
reviewed by the probate judge assigned to the case. Depending on local
and state laws, the judge may then select a bid for approval or reopen the
bidding. Because of legal procedures and delays, bidding on probate
properties can require perseverance. Judges wield substantial discretion
in deciding when and whether to accept a probate bid. You can never
tell for sure where you stand.
An acquaintance of mine tells of a probate property that came up
for sale in an area of $150,000 homes. The probate administrator listed
the house for sale at $115,000. A ﬂurry of bids came in that ranged from
a low of $105,000 up to a high of $118,000. Several months later the
judge looked at the bids, rejected the high bid of
$118,000, and solicited additional offers. Eventually,
Probate judges
the judge approved the sale at a price of $129,850
to someone who had not even been involved in the
may exercise
ﬁrst round of bidding.
arbitrary power.
After all was said and done, the successful
buyer did achieve a bargain price. (Unlike forced
sales “on the courthouse steps,” in a probate sale, you generally can enter
and inspect the properties prior to submitting a bid.) To learn about probate in your area, talk with a probate lawyer or the clerk of the county
court. Also look at local newspapers that announce upcoming probate
sales.

Estate Sales
In some situations, an estate’s assets need not be dragged through the
probate process. You may be able to buy directly from the heirs or the
executor of the estate. In fact, some buyers of estate properties follow
the obituary notices, contact heirs, and try to buy before the property is

More Sources of Bargains

159

listed with a real estate agent. To succeed in this approach, you would, naturally, need to develop an empathetic demeanor.
heirs, you often
Estate sales frequently produce bargains beﬁnd eager sellers.
cause heirs eagerly want cash. They also may need
the money to pay off a mortgage, other creditors, or
estate taxes. Out-of-town heirs (especially) may not want to hold a vacant property for an extended period until a top-dollar buyer is found.
Once again, pressures of time or money can lead to sales prices that fall
below a property’s market value.

When you contact

Private Auctions
Increasingly, many sellers who want to liquidate their properties turn to
private auctions. During the last economic downturn in California,
banks and thrifts were pooling their REOs and jointly auctioning off
dozens (sometimes hundreds) of properties at a
time. New homebuilders, too, have increased their
use of auctions. Sometimes homebuilder auctions
Homebuilders (or
involve closeout sales where a builder wants to get
their lenders) may
out of a current project to devote time and energy
auction off excess
to a new development. On other occasions, a homebuilder’s auction may represent a last desperate atinventory.
tempt to raise cash to head off project foreclosure
or company bankruptcy.
In Dallas, a wealthy homeowner tired of trying to sell his $1.6 million (listed price) home through a brokerage ﬁrm and was eager to move
into his newly built $4.4 million home. So he hired an auctioneer. On a
pleasant Saturday morning, hundreds of people showed up and within
minutes of the opening bid, the home had a new owner. The winning
price: $890,000.

Prepare for an Auction
Attend a major real estate auction. You’ll have fun. Often a band is playing, food and drinks are served, and a festive mood prevails. The auction
company wants to make potential bidders feel good. But beyond this dis-

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

160

play of cheer, the auction company is promoting
one goal: Get every property sold at the highest possible price. Auctioneers get paid a percentage of the
make for festive
day’s take, plus perhaps a bonus for exceeding a cerevents.
tain level of sales.
To ﬁnd a bargain, don’t get caught up in the festive frenzy and abandon good sense (as the auction company wants you
to). Instead, attend the auction armed with information. Prepare to walk
out a winner—not simply a buyer. Here’s how you can make that happen:
Private auctions

◆ Always thoroughly inspect a property. During the weeks

before most private auctions, the auction company will schedule
open houses at the properties to be sold. If you can’t visit an
open house, contact a real estate agent and ask for a personal
showing. (Most auction companies cooperate with Realtors. If
an agent brings a winning bidder to the auction, that agent is
paid a 1 percent or 2 percent sales commission.) Sometimes auction properties sell cheap because they are nothing more than
teardowns waiting for a bulldozer. Or they may suffer any of a
number of other problems. Even new properties aren’t necessarily defect free. Check them out before you bid.
◆ Appraise the property carefully. Even if free of defects, you
can’t assume value. You must ﬁgure it out by studying recent selling prices of comparable properties. Don’t count on list price to
guide you. Just because you buy a property 25 percent below its
previous listing price doesn’t mean you have bought at 25 percent below the property’s market value.
◆ Set a maximum bid price. Remember, you’re looking for a bargain. Market value tells you what a property might sell for if
ﬁxed up and marketed by a competent and aggressive real estate
agent. Market value does not tell you the price you should bid.
Before the auction, set your maximum bid price. Don’t let the
auctioneer’s “boosters” cajole, excite, romance, bamboozle, or intimidate you into going higher.
◆ Be aware of the buyer’s premium. At many auctions, you will
be required to pay a 5 or 10 percent “buyer’s premium” fee in addition to your bid price.
◆ Review the paperwork that will accompany a successful
bid. Before the auction begins, review the property tax statements, environmental reports, lot survey, legal description, and
the sales contract you’ll be asked to sign.

More Sources of Bargains

161

◆ Learn what type of deed the seller will use to convey the

property. With a general warranty deed, the seller guarantees
clear title subject only to certain named exceptions. Other types
of deeds convey fewer title warranties. Don’t accept a deed without an understanding of its limitations (liens, easements, encroachments, exceptions, missing heirs, etc.). All in all, title
insurance is your best guarantee. If a property’s title is uninsurable, consult a real estate attorney to obtain an opinion of title.
◆ Be prepared to pay the deposit. To become eligible to bid,
register with the auction company before the auction begins and
show proof of deposit funds or cashier’s checks (amount varies
by auction). You then will be issued a bid card that will tell the
auctioneer you are an approved bidder. Without a bid card, the
auctioneer won’t recognize your bid.
◆ Find out if ﬁnancing is available. Often auction companies
prearrange ﬁnancing on some or all of their properties. If so, ﬁnd
out the terms and qualifying standards. If not, determine how
much time the auction company gives you to arrange your own
ﬁnancing. Unlike most government agency property auctions,
private auction companies typically do not expect their successful bidders to pay cash for their properties.
◆ Learn whether the sale is absolute or subject to a reserve
price. Usually auction properties are either offered absolute or
with reserve. If absolute, a property is sold no matter how low
the top bidder’s price. With a reserve price, the top bid must exceed a prearranged minimum amount or the property is pulled
out of the auction. On occasion, though, the owner of a property
may “nod” to the auctioneer and approve a bid that does not
meet the reserve price.

How to Find Auctions
Most auction companies advertise their upcoming auctions in local and
sometimes national newspapers (such as the Wall Street Journal ). Auction companies not only want to attract as many bidders as possible,
they want to draw large crowds so they can create a sense of anticipation and excitement. In addition to advertising, most auction companies
will place your name on their mailing lists.
Local auction companies are listed in the phone book. Large-scale
auctions, though, are frequently handled by auction companies that

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

162

operate nationwide. These include Fisher Auction Company, Hudson &
Marshall, JP King, Kennedy-Wilson, Larry Latham, NRC Auctions, Ross
Dove & Company, and Sheldon Good & Company. Even if you decide not
to bid, large auctions are fun to attend. Try one. Plus, you’ll learn the
tricks of the trade as you watch the professional auctioneers and investors vie with one another.

Short Sale Bargains
Up to this point, you’ve discovered multiple ways to ﬁnd properties that
you can buy at a bargain price. You’ve learned about motivated sellers,
foreclosures, REOs, auctions, probate, and estate sales. Now, you’re going
to see how to create a bargain price by negotiating with a lienholder. Investors call this technique a short sale.

What Is a Short Sale?
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the “short sale”
technique gained momentum in the serious real esUpside-down
tate recession that plagued California,Texas, and sevproperty owners
eral other parts of the country. Investors and
create the need
lenders used the short sale to help rescue upsidedown property owners who had fallen behind on
and opportunity.
their mortgage payments (or in some cases, where
they were about to fall behind).
Let’s say that during a speculative real estate
boom you buy a home for $300,000. You put 5 perUpside-down
cent down and borrow $285,000 from a lender.
owners owe more
After three years of owning the property, you get
laid off. Even worse, the market value of your propthan their
erty falls to $265,000. You would like to sell the
property is worth.
house, but now you owe more than it’s worth.
You’re upside down.
Even if you found a buyer to give you a full price offer, you wouldn’t
net enough to pay your lender, closing expenses, a real estate commission, and accumulated deferred maintenance (repair) costs. What can
you do?

More Sources of Bargains

163

Unfortunately, without a job, you can no longer make your mortgage payments. Nor is it likely that you can reﬁnance. Your lender threatens to foreclose. Your situation looks bleak.
Lender, Too, Faces Bleak (Money-Losing) Outcome The lender is
threatening to foreclose, but it doesn’t really want to. If the lender forecloses, it will surely lose money.
In your present difﬁcult situation, you owe the lender a total of
$280,000 (mortgage balance, missed payments). If the lender goes
through foreclosure, it will want to collect not only this $280,000, but
also numerous other costs such as . . .
◆ Attorney fees
◆ Court costs
◆ Lost interest
◆ Property insurance premiums
◆ Property tax payments
◆ Miscellaneous costs (staff time, property upkeep, paperwork,

bad publicity)
If these other costs total $20,000 through the date of the foreclosure
sale, the lender would have $300,000 sunk into this property.
How much would a foreclosure speculator bid for the property at
auction? Maybe $200,000. If the lender lets this speculator take the
property, the lender loses around $100,000.
Total sums owed
Speculator bid
Lender loss

$300,000
200,000
100,000

Alternatively, the lender may choose not to let the property go to a foreclosure speculator. It could shut out the speculators with a bid of
$300,001. If the lender wins its bid, it then owns the property as an REO.
Does acquiring the REO solve the lender’s problem? No. The lender
will continue to lose interest earnings on the money it has put out
thus far on the property. Plus, it must still pay property taxes, premiums for property insurance, propREOs don’t end the
erty upkeep, and repairs. To actually get the
property sold, the lender will probably pay ﬁx-up
lender’s misery.
costs and a real estate commission.

164

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Lenders Lose with REOs After all of these efforts and costs, will the
lender eventually come out ahead with its REO? Still, the answer is no.
Remember, at most, the property will bring a price of $265,000. Here’s
how the numbers might look.
Balance owed at foreclosure
REO costs
Real estate commission @ 6%
Total
REO sales price
Lender loss with REO

$300,000
15,000
15,900
$330,900
265,000
(65,900)

Even with the REO alternative, the lender loses $65,900 (and that
assumes an REO sale at full market value—which is not likely). So, ask
yourself if, as an investor, you could work out a way for lenders with bad
loans to lose less money. Would the lender accept your solution? In many
instances, the answer to that question is yes.
The Pre-Foreclosure Workout What if, before the lender ﬁled foreclosure on a bad loan, you could get the lender to accept a short payoff—some amount less than the total balance the borrower owes? Quite
likely you could save the lender from losing as much money as it otherwise would by going through with its foreclosure. You would help the
borrowers salvage what’s left of their credit record. (Late payments
don’t bring down a credit score nearly as much as would a foreclosure.)
What’s in it for you? You acquire a property for less than its market
value. Let’s go back to the earlier example at the point in time when the
borrowers owed $280,000—only now we’ll assume that you’re the investor.
How the Numbers Look You talk with the borrowers. You learn
their bleak upside-down situation. You offer them $1 for their property
with the proviso that you can work out a short payoff on their loan with
their lender. You succeed. Their lender agrees to accept $230,000. In exchange, the lender grants a full release of the mortgage lien it held against the property.
In a short sale, the
The sellers/borrowers get to begin a new ﬁlender accepts less
nancial life free of mortgage debt, free of mortgage
payments they cannot make, and free of waking up
to lose less.
in the middle of the night and ﬂipping on the TV to

More Sources of Bargains

165

ﬁnd nothing but Carleton Sheets and Ron Popiel infomercials. The
lender loses only $50,000, instead of the $65,900 (or more) that it would
have lost by foreclosing the borrowers and eventually ending up with
another REO that it does not want.
As for you, the investor, you’ve just become the owner of a
$265,000 property for an outlay of $230,001. Everybody comes out
ahead.

How to Actually Complete a Short Sale
To complete a short sale, you will typically need to negotiate well and
diligently persevere. To earn your gain of $25,000 to $100,000 from this
technique may require anywhere from several
weeks to several months of back-and-forth talks and
Short sales yield
proposals. And even after this effort, you may still
big proﬁts for
fail to put all of the pieces together.
But when you do succeed, all of those efforts
investors—but
do pay off handsomely. So let’s look at the steps you
require effort.
can take to beat the odds.
Find Sellers in Financial Distress (or Otherwise Motivated to
Deal) To complete a short sale, you ﬁrst need to ﬁnd sellers who are ﬁnancially distressed or otherwise eager to cut a deal that frees them from
their property and their mortgage obligations. How can you ﬁnd these
motivated sellers?
You’ve got dozens of possibilities. Just revisit all of the techniques
we’ve discussed so far, and especially those shown in Box 9.1. Remember, every day some people’s lives change to make property ownership a
burden. When you ﬁgure out a way to relieve that burden, you help the
sellers and you help yourself.
Review the Sellers’ Mortgage Payment Records After you’ve established rapport with the sellers and set the tone for productive discussions, you need to review their mortgage payment records and all
collection letters thus far sent by their lender. Speciﬁcally, you want to
learn:
◆ The current payoff amount on the loan including all back pay-

ments, late fees, and legal fees assessed by the lender (if any).

166

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

◆ Where the lender is in its collection efforts. In my experience,

I’ve found lenders are more inclined to complete a short sale
when the borrowers have missed multiple monthly payments.
The borrowers are so seriously delinquent that the lender believes the property will almost certainly end up in foreclosure.
◆ How the full amount the borrowers owe compares with the
likely selling price of their mortgaged property.
◆ Whether it appears that a foreclosure will lose the lender a lot of
money, after adding in continued lost interest and other expenses. If so, you’ve located a hot prospect for a short payoff.
Review the Sellers’ Total Financial Picture Before a lender will accept a short payoff, the borrowers must prove destitution. By destitution, I don’t mean that the borrowers will soon be living on food stamps
in the back of their car. But the lender will probe to determine whether
the borrowers own any valuable assets that they
could sell to raise money.
The lender also will look at the borrowers’
Lenders won’t let
earnings history and career prospects. If the borborrowers just
rowers look like they’re merely trying to shirk their
walk away from
mortgage obligations, the lender won’t likely negotiate (unless you persuade the collections staff to retheir mortgage.
think their position).
Place the Property Under Contract When your preliminary talks
and investigation show that the borrowers really can’t pay and that the
lender is heading toward big losses, get the property under contract.
Offer the sellers some token amount ($1) in exchange for a deed
to their property. In addition, you agree to permanently get the lender
off their backs. By doing so, you save the sellers’ credit and restore
their peace of mind (at least as it relates to this imminent foreclosure).
However, because at this point you don’t know whether the lender
will accept a short payoff, you must also include a contingency in your
offer to the sellers that reads something like this:
This agreement between
you
and
sellers
is subject to
you
obtaining full satisfaction of all claims levied
by lender for an amount not to exceed $
.

More Sources of Bargains

167

The maximum amount you actually commit to pay the lender will
depend on the amount of proﬁt you plan to earn and the riskiness of the
property (current condition, certainty with which you can achieve your
desired selling price). Do not agree to pay the sellers any real money, because the lender won’t approve it. Only rarely will a lender permit borrowers to put cash in their own pocket from a sale when at the same
time the lender agrees to take a loss.
Obtain Permission to Negotiate with the Lender At the time the
sellers accept your offer, you also will get them to sign a form that authorizes the lender to release the sellers’ loan information to you. This form allows you to verify all of the mortgage payment data
that the sellers have provided you. Plus, it gives the
lender authority to negotiate a payoff with you.
Lenders require
Without this form, the lender will not share
you to provide
otherwise conﬁdential loan data about its borrowthem a seller
ers with you. Make sure the sellers understand the
release form.
need for this release. Without it, you’re just shooting
blanks.
Approach the Lender When you ﬁrst approach the lender, do not—
I repeat, do not—even suggest the mortgage payoff price that you have
in mind. During this preliminary meeting (most probably with a staff ofﬁcer in the lender’s loss mitigation department), learn the lender’s views
about short payoffs. Learn the criteria the lender applies. Learn the
lender’s standard policies and operating procedures.
Different lenders try to settle their bad loans in different ways.
Some hardballers won’t budge. Others are glad to see you. Some (perhaps the majority) will act standofﬁsh but can be
persuaded to negotiate when you show them why
Bank staff may not
your solution will work to their advantage. (Never
immediately open
assume that all of the bank personnel who staff loss
mitigation departments understand why short payup to you.
offs can beneﬁt the lender.)
Prepare and Submit Your Offer You’ve opened discussions with
the lender and gathered information about its payoff policies. Ideally,
during these talks, the lender will have given you clues as to how much
discount it’s willing to accept. (Regardless, though, always offer far less

168

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

than you’re willing to pay.) You’re now ready to prepare and submit an
offer.
But wait. You don’t want to just give the lender a number. In most
instances, you will need to ﬁrst build your case. You will need to submit
a full package of persuasive evidence. This package should include:
◆ Cover letter. Here’s where you lay out in summary form all of

the evidence that you’ve submitted to prove why a short payoff
now will beneﬁt the lender. However, do not put precise ﬁgures
in this letter. Build up the merits of the idea before you start talking numbers. Talk beneﬁts before price.
◆ Condition of the property. Take as many unﬂattering photos
of the property as you can. Submit those that look the worst.
Also, submit repair cost estimates (as high as you can reasonably
justify).
◆ Comparable sales. Choose the lowest-priced, best-looking
comparable sale properties that you can ﬁnd. Use these comp
sales to support the lowest possible estimate of market value for
the mortgaged property. The less the lender thinks the property
will bring at foreclosure (or as an REO), the more willing it will
be to accept your short-sale offer.
◆ Owner distress pleas. In this part of the offering package, you
will include a hardship letter from the borrowers. This letter will
explain all of the tough times these folks are experiencing. For
support, include those threatening letters the borrowers have received from the IRS, those large unpaid medical bills, the electricity cutoff notice from the utility company, and the newspaper
article that explains why 400 laid-off workers at the local textile
plant (where both of the borrowers worked) will never be called
back.
◆ Credibility. As in all negotiations, provide evidence to the
lender that as soon as the lender accepts your offer, you are
ready, willing, and able to close. Prove to the lender that you will
perform as promised.
◆ Your offer. On this ﬁnal page of your package, calculate the
amount of losses the lender will suffer if it continues the foreclosure process. Then, show your bid payoff amount. The ﬁgures
should show that the lender will net more if it acts now to accept your offer.

More Sources of Bargains

169

◆ Persistently follow up. Do not get discouraged if the lender

doesn’t immediately respond to your offer. Follow up, follow up,
follow up. If the lender won’t accept, then weasel, cajole, or persuade the loss mitigation ofﬁcer to suggest a number that might
look good. Do whatever you can to keep the dialogue alive.
Coming Up with the Money To maximize the attractiveness of your
offer to the lender, talk cash. Lenders typically prefer to cash out their
bad loans. Rarely would a lender agree to a discounted payoff and carryback ﬁnancing. (Yet, if necessary, you can still ask.)
How can you raise this money if you don’t already have it? Return
to Chapters 3–8. Given the bargain deal that you’ve just negotiated, you
should be able to easily ﬂip the property to another buyer (who has the
cash to close), secure low- (or no-) down-payment ﬁnancing from another lender, or bring in a money partner.
With a near-sure proﬁt from the transaction, you will ﬁnd the
money. Nevertheless, don’t wait to the last minute. Not only do you need
to prove your credibility in your bid package, but after a lender accepts
your offer you can’t delay. Line up a sure source of cash before you submit your bid.

C H A P T E R

12

Run Numbers Like a Pro

In this chapter, you’re going to see some easy ways to ﬁgure out whether
a property you’re looking at will really give you a great buy. If your property looks good on all (or even most) of these benchmarks, you’re almost
certain to make a lot of money.
◆ The construction cycle
◆ Per-unit measures
◆ Gross rent multipliers
◆ Capitalized value
◆ Cash ﬂow returns
◆ Potential for creating value

After you learn these value benchmarks, you’ll see that contrary to
popular belief, at times you can achieve a great return plus a margin of
safety—even if you pay above market value.
The trick, of course, is to know what you’re doing and why you’re
doing it. Too many beginning investors merely chase after “belowmarket” buys, and reject in knee-jerk fashion all properties priced at or
above market. Instead, as a savvy, entrepreneurial investor, you’ll want to
run your potential buys through a variety of ﬁnancial tests. High passing
grades will tell you when you’ve really found a property that will prove
to be a star performer.
Certainly, buying below market can give you a great bargain. But
that’s not the only way to score a good deal.
170

Run Numbers Like a Pro

171

Follow the Construction Cycle
When you invest, you expect to proﬁt as the property appreciates in
value. Over the long run, as construction costs go up and population increases, property values nearly always increase. In the short run, though,
current market values sometimes jump too far above construction costs.
Eyeing large proﬁts, builders rush to construct new houses, condominiums, and apartments. They glut the market with too
many new houses and rental properties. Journalists
Over time, higher
proclaim, “Real estate’s no longer a good investment.”The foreclosure rate begins to climb.
building costs pull
The market heads toward the ebb of the conup property
struction cycle. Guess what? You’re now facing the
values.
perfect time to buy.

How to Proﬁt from the Construction Cycle
Here’s how the construction cycle works: Typically, a city, town, or vacation area begins to boom. Jobs and wages go up. More people move in.
Interest rates decline. Apartment rents and home prices climb higher.
Apartment vacancies disappear. The number of homes up for sale begins
to decline. Pretty soon, existing houses or apartments that could be constructed new for say, $100,000 per unit begin to command prices of, say,
$120,000, $130,000 or more.

Builders Spy Opportunity
With prices of existing properties well above their construction costs,
builders can quickly make a lot of money. Build at $100,000; sell at
$130,000. Great! $30,000 proﬁt. Naturally, too many builders rush in to
grab a pile of proﬁts. Because of these optimistic
builder expectations, the supply of new homes
shoots up. What was recently a shortage becomes a
High builder proﬁt
surplus. Buyers who bought near the top of the
margins may lead
cycle face disappointment (or worse) as rent levels
and property prices temporarily stagnate or slide
to overbuilding.
back to lower levels.

172

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Recovery Over time, banks pull back their mortgage lending. Builders
sharply cut their new developments. Rental vacancies begin to tighten;
the number of unsold homes begins to fall. Potential renters and homebuyers again outnumber the supply of available properties. Property
prices and rents stabilize and then edge up. Eventually, as shortages
again loom on the horizon, vacancies fall further. Prices take off on another rapid run-up. The construction cycle turns another revolution.
Prices set new record highs.

Implications for Investors
The classic major boom-bust construction cycle occurred in Texas in
the mid to late 1980s. Properties that could be built new for $75,000
to $100,000 sold for as much as $125,000 to $150,000. Condominium
and apartment projects multiplied like dandelions after an April rain.
Back then, large real estate tax shelter beneﬁts added fuel to the ﬁre. In
a situation similar to the dot-coms and tech stocks in the late 1990s,
rapid price increases fed on themselves—until the real estate bubble
burst.
Pitfalls Could Texas investors have avoided getting caught in this
downdraft? Absolutely. Had they kept an eye on construction costs, they
could have anticipated problems. For whenever the market prices of
properties push more than 10 to 15 percent ahead
of their new replacement costs, the market is ﬂashLarge proﬁts for
ing yellow. Yet, rather than cautiously slow down,
most would-be investors (and builders) speed up.
builders can bring
Savvy investors, though, pay attention to this
too much new
warning sign. They back off from new acquisitions
supply to market.
or buy only when they can get their price—not the
inﬂated (and soon-to-be-deﬂated) market price.
The moral: Stay in touch with local builders or others who are in
the know about contractor costs (building suppliers, lumber yards, real
estate appraisers, building contractors, construction lenders). Also, you
might consult one or more construction cost services. You can easily follow your local building costs through cost manuals (at your library) or
websites. When builder proﬁt margins grow ever fatter, oversupply becomes a real threat.

Run Numbers Like a Pro

173

Proﬁt When Values Drop Below the Costs to Build New Rents
low? Vacancies climbing? Unsold houses and condos piling up in the Realtors’ Multiple Listing Service? Builders going bankrupt? Lenders foreclosing? Great! That’s the perfect time for investors to buy—especially
when market prices end up below replacement costs. Because that
means few builders will build. Builders will not knowingly pay more to
build a house than they can get from its selling price.
As long as longer-term trends in an area point to a larger population,
more jobs, and a desirable quality of life, prices (rents)
are guaranteed to rise. More people, growing inDepressed markets
comes, higher construction costs.You can proﬁt from
the construction cycle because decade-by-decade
reduce risk.
property prices will continue to set new peaks.
Have Money, Will Travel Will local or regional shakeouts occur in
the future? Probably. Although builders and construction lenders have
supposedly entered a new era of disciplined building and lending, that
story’s been told before. It seems that each generation forgets the mistakes of the past. They must relearn the lessons taught in earlier years.
Stay informed. Keep tabs on various cities and
real estate markets around the country. Should
Stay informed
property prices again plunge below their cost of replacement,
don’t miss that opportunity. Adopt the
about out-of-town
motto,“Have Money (Credit), Will Travel.” If the barmarkets.
gains don’t come to you, then, as a entrepreneurial
investor, prepare to go to the bargains.

Local (Regional) Recessions
Even without serious overbuilding, property prices can sometimes fall
below replacement costs due to job declines and recession. During the early
1990s, large layoffs in the defense and aerospace industry created the housing troubles experienced in Southern California. But as with Texas and New
York City, the Southern California economy had to bounce back. And when
it did, we witnessed a great boom in property prices. Follow the real estate
cycle and you, too, can earn those big bucks that recovery brings about.
Construction Costs   Market Price = Bargain Hunter’s Delight

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

174

Per-Unit Measures
In addition to tuning in to the construction cycle, savvy real estate investors rely on various per-unit measures to help them decide whether a
property looks like a good buy. Like all rough measures or rules of thumb, per-unit ﬁgures signal
whether a property tends to be priced over or
To compare
under some benchmark norm. Though never comproperties, use
pelling on their own, these measures will give you
another important test to apply to your potential inper-unit prices.
vestments.

Per Apartment Unit
When you look at multiunit apartment buildings, divide the asking price
by the number of apartment units in the property. For example, for an
eight-unit property priced at $450,000, you would calculate:
$450,000
8
price per unit = $56,250

price per unit =

If you know that other similar apartment buildings have typically sold
for $60,000 to $70,000 per unit, you may have found a bargain. This and
other per-unit measures also give you a quick way to compare prices
when rental properties differ in the number of their units. Say you’re
comparing a 6-unit, a 9-unit, and an 11-unit property at the respective
prices of $275,000, $435,000, and $487,500. By ﬁguring per-unit prices,
you can easily rank the properties from the lowest priced to the highest.
No. Units

Price

Price per Unit

11
6
9

$487,500
$275,000
$435,000

$44,318
$45,833
$48,333

Size, Quality, and Location Ideally, the units you compare should
closely match each other. However, if that’s not possible, adjust your valuations to reﬂect size, quality, and location differences among proper-

Run Numbers Like a Pro

175

ties. Especially consider important location, site, and building features.
Although I’m not trying to push you into the “analysis paralysis” so
common in MBA programs, do try to spot those “differences that make
a difference.” When you use a checklist to compare building features,
you can better rank properties according to their
proﬁt potential. (See the checklist at my website,
stoprentingnow.com.)
Arbitrage your
investments. Buy
in one market, sell
in another.

Opportunity Knocks (Arbitrage) Primarily,
price-per-unit measures can help you ﬁnd “bargain”
buildings. But this measure can also help you spot
opportunities in two other ways:

◆ Size. Change the size of the units from larger to smaller, or vice

versa. Imagine that smaller 700- to 800-square-foot units sell and
rent at substantial premiums over larger units of 1,200 to 1,400
square feet. So, if you buy a building of predominantly larger
units, you could earn a big payoff when you redesign the building’s space into smaller units.
◆ Conversion. You might also proﬁt by noticing that buildings
with two-bedroom rentals typically sell in the $40,000 to
$50,000 per-unit range. Yet, in similar condo buildings, twobedroom units sell in the $70,000 to $80,000 range. Or this price
difference might appear in the opposite direction. Either way,
you may be able to buy at the lower-priced use, convert, then sell
(or rent) at the high-priced use.
Although arbitrage opportunities don’t occur everyday, they do
come up every now and then. So, pay attention to relative prices. Prepare to jump when you can buy a building at a low price and then convert it to a use that sells at a higher price.

Per-Square-Foot (p.s.f.) Measures
You’ve probably heard property buyers and sellers remark that a property sold for say, $135 per square foot. Price per square foot (p.s.f.)
represents one of the most widely used methods of benchmark pricing. Investors and homebuyers alike rely on it to ballpark values.
When you calculate a per-square-foot ﬁgure, you simply divide the

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

176

total square footage of the unit (house, apartment, or total building)
into its price:
p.s.f. =

asking price
square footage

p.s.f. =

$285, 000
1, 900

p.s.f. = $150

If comparable sale properties typically have sold at $170 to $180
p.s.f., a price of $150 p.s.f. may represent a great bargain.
Unfortunately, naive investors can go wrong using per-square-foot
ﬁgures because no uniform standards apply. All square feet are not created equal in terms of quality, design, and usability. So calculate p.s.f. ﬁgures with caution. For example, unless designed with market appeal,
converted garages, basements, and attics are worth
far less per square foot than a property’s original living areas.
Not all square
Also, look out for mismatches of size. Some
footage counts
buildings are constructed with room counts or
equally.
room sizes far out of proportion to each other, or to
competing properties.

Gross Rent Multipliers (GRMs)
To value rental houses and small apartment buildings, you can also divide
the property’s price by its total (gross) rent collections. As shown below,this
calculation gives you a gross rent multiplier. Consider these market data:
Sales Price
College Terrace
Bivens Lake Apts.
Four Palms

$434,500
$526,680
$323,610

Annual Rent Collections
 
 
 

$55,000
$62,700
$48,300

 
 
 

GRM
7.9
8.4
6.7

If you ﬁnd an income property with a relatively high GRM, it
could signal either a price too high, or rents too low. Further checking
would reveal the answer. Throughout the United States and Canada,

Run Numbers Like a Pro

177

I’ve seen annual gross rent multipliers as low as 4.0
(such as rundown properties or unpopular neighGRMs vary by
borhoods), and as high as 13 (coastal California
neighborhood.
cities). In my present university town, annual gross
Check sales of
rent multipliers typically range from a low of 6.0
(unexceptional student housing) to 8.2 (newer
comparable
units in professional, but not premier, neighborproperties.
hoods).
As a rule, when annual gross rent multipliers
go much above 8.0, you’re often looking at negative cash ﬂows—unless
you increase your down payment to 30 percent or more.1 Because big
cities and vacation towns with high housing prices often produce GRMs
of 10 or higher, cash-ﬂow investors who live in those areas should buy
their rental houses and apartments elsewhere. Or, in
high-priced areas, you can look for neighborhoods
or market niches (condominiums, lower-middle inHigh GRMs signal
come segment, outlying suburbs) that offer a more
negative cash ﬂow.
proﬁtable balance of property prices and the level
of the rents.

Capitalized Value
As you’ve already seen, you can also appraise an income property by ﬁguring its capitalized value:
V=

NOI
R

Where V represents the estimated market value of the property, NOI (net
operating income) represents the property’s rents less expenses, and R
equals the market capitalization rate. To illustrate, here’s how this technique would look for a six-unit apartment building:

1. Based on current mortgage rates for creditworthy investors of around 6.0 to 7.0 percent on
small rental properties.

178

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Six-unit Income Statement (Annual)
1. Gross annual potential rents ($725/mo.   12   6)
2. Income from parking and storage areas
3. Vacancy and collection losses @ 7%
4. Effective gross income
Less operating and ﬁxed expenses
5. Trash pick-up
6. Utilities
7. Licenses and permit fees
8. Advertising and promotion
9. Management fees @ 6%
10. Maintenance and repairs
11. Yard care
12. Miscellaneous
13. Property taxes
14. Property and liability insurance
15. Reserves for replacement
16. Total operating and ﬁxed expenses
Net operating income (NOI)

$52,200
5,062
(4,009)
$53,254
$1,080
450
206
900
3,195
3,000
488
2,250
3,202
1,267
1,875
$17,914
$35,340

You can easily compute NOI. But, if you’re not careful, you can still
err. To alert you to these possible traps, think about the following warnings (which match up numerically with the entries shown on the income statement):
1. Gross potential rents. For this ﬁgure, use the property’s existing rent levels. If its current rents sit above market, use market rent levels. Verify all leases for rental amounts and lease
terms. Do not use a rent ﬁgure based on your anticipated rent
increases (if any).
2. Extra income. With many properties, you can charge for
rental application fees, parking, storage, laundry, party room,
garages, and so on. Verify all of this income. Don’t count extra
income that’s not been proven by past operating experience
or reasonable market data.
3. Vacancy and collection losses. Use market vacancy rates,
or the current owner’s vacancies for the past year—
whichever is higher. Also, when judging market vacancy rates,
take your ﬁgures from the market niche in which this prop-

Run Numbers Like a Pro

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

179

erty currently operates. Vacancy rates may vary signiﬁcantly
by neighborhood, apartment size, quality, and rent level. As
you compare vacancy rates by market niche, try to spot those
segments that are experiencing the greatest shortages.
Effective gross income. It is from this cash that you will
pay property expenses and mortgage payments. If you overestimate rent levels or underestimate vacancies, you may end
up cash-short.
Trash pick-up. Verify rates and permissible quantities. Look
for lower-cost alternatives.
Utilities. In addition to common area lighting, some buildings
include centralized heat and air systems. Verify the amounts of
these expenses with utility companies.
License and permit fees. On occasion, owners of rental properties are required to pay municipal fees of one sort or another.
Lease-up expenses. Ideally, you will generate a good supply
of rental applicants from free postings, referrals, and inquiries;
otherwise, you may need to advertise. Also, you’ll probably
need to pay for credit checks on potential tenants.
Management fees. Even if you self-manage your units, allocate some expense here for your time and effort. Don’t confuse return on labor for return on investment.
Maintenance and repairs. Enter an expense to pay yourself
or others. “I’ll take care of that myself” shouldn’t mean, “I’ll
work for free.”
Grounds maintenance. Yard care entails mowing the lawn,
trimming hedges, removing snow, cleaning up leaves, tending
to the ﬂower beds, and so on.
Miscellaneous. You will incur such odds-and-ends expenses
as lease preparation, auto mileage, and long-distance telephone charges.
Property taxes. Verify amount, tax rate, and assessed value.
Check accuracy. Note whether the property is subject to any
special assessments (sewer, sidewalks, water reclamation).
Property and liability insurance. Verify exact coverage for
property and types of losses. Increase deductibles and limits
on liability.
Reserves for replacement. Eventually, you’ll need to replace the roof, HVAC, appliances, carpeting, and other limitedlife items. Allocate a pro rata annual amount here.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

180

16. Net operating income (NOI). Subtract all expenses from effective gross income. You now have the numerator for V =
NOI/R.
As a rule, ﬁgure a building’s NOI conservatively. Don’t make grand
assumptions about potential rent increases. Don’t understate or omit
necessary expenses. Verify, verify, verify. Allocate reasonable amounts for
replacement reserves. Ask to see the sellers’ Schedule E where they have reported property revenues
Ask for the sellers’
and expenses to the IRS. (You may get resistance on
this request. But listen carefully to the sellers’ exSchedule E.
cuses. Are they plausible?)

Estimate Market Value
After ﬁguring NOI, you next need to come up with an accurate capitalization rate (R). To ﬁgure this cap rate, compare the NOIs (net operating
incomes) of similar properties to their selling prices. You can get this information when you talk with realty agents who regularly sell (and
preferably own) small rental properties, or from
other investors (a local realty investment club, for
Cap rates are set
example). Competent property management ﬁrms
also stay informed about local cap rates. After learnby local markets.
ing the market in your area, list your cap rate data as
follows:
Property
Hampton Apts. (8 units)
Woodruff Apts. (6 units)
Adams Manor (6 units)
Newport Apts. (9 units)
Ridge Terrace (8 units)

Recent Sales Price

NOI

R

$452,900
360,000
295,000
549,000
471,210

$43,211
35,900
28,440
53,700
42,409

.0954
.0997
.0964
.0978
.09

From this comparable sale data, you might think that Ridge Terrace and
Hampton Apartments seem most like the property that you’re valuing.
So, you select cap rates of .09 and .095. Then, you calculate a value range
for the property you’re looking at:

Run Numbers Like a Pro

1.

V=

181

$35,340 (NOI)
.09 (R)

V = $392, 666

2.

V=

$35,340 (NOI)
.098 (R)

V = $360, 612

You now know the market value range for your property falls between
$360,000 and $390,000.
Throughout the country, cap rates for small rental properties may
run from as low as .06 or .07 up to .12, .14, or higher. Generally, a low
cap rate occurs when you’re valuing highly desirable properties in good to top neighborhoods.
Apartment buildings with condo conversion potenThe lower the cap
tial also tend to sell with low cap rates. Remember, a
rate, the higher
low cap rate will create a relatively high property
the value of a
value and a high cap rate yields a relatively low
property value. Relatively high cap rates apply to
property.
less desirable properties in so-so neighborhoods.

Anticipate the Future; Pay for the Present
In the previous NOI example, you relied on veriﬁed income and expense
ﬁgures drawn from the property’s current operating history and your
knowledge of competitive properties.Yet, as an entrepreneurial investor,
you will improve your properties through ﬁx-up work and renovations,
better property management, and perhaps even neighborhood revitalization. Your improvements can dramatically boost your property’s net
income and at the same time lower the property’s
cap rate. Your property’s value can quickly jump by
Sellers will ask you
20 percent, 30 percent, or more.
Here’s how you need to exercise caution.
to pay for
When you negotiate to buy, focus on the present,
potential. Savvy
not your (or the seller’s) vision of the future. Ininvestors pay only
vestors who anticipate great proﬁts often pay too
much. They let the sellers capture the value potenfor “as is.”
tial that they plan to create.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

182

Mum’s the Word: Don’t Tell Sellers Your Plans
Beginning investors, especially, tend to reveal too much of their plans
for a property. To gain a bargain price, don’t turn your cards so that
the sellers (or their sales agent) can see them. If you explicitly question the sellers in ways that reveal your value-creating ideas, the sellers will likely use that potential to strengthen their own negotiating
position.
In most cases, sellers already hold inﬂated
ideas about all the great things you can do to enAvoid signaling
hance their property—which regrettably, they say,
they never had the time (or money) to accomplish.
your plans to a
With such ploys common, you need not load the
seller.
sellers with even more ammunition to ﬁre back at
you. As much as possible, negotiate for the property
as it currently is operated. Reap any future upside as your bonus for entrepreneurial insights.

Cash Flow Returns
In addition to market value, you should also judge your properties by
the cash ﬂow returns they will yield. To illustrate, let’s bring forward
that six-unit apartment building from several pages back. Assume you
can buy that property for $350,000 (around $60,000 per unit). You talk
to a lender and tentatively arrange a mortgage for $280,000 (an 80 percent loan-to-value ratio). The lender wants an 8.0 percent interest rate
with a 25-year term. You would need to put $70,000 down. Here are the
relevant ﬁgures:
Loan amount
Annualized mortgage payments @ 8.0%; 25 years
Net operating income (NOI)
Less mortgage payments
BTCF (before tax cash ﬂow)

$350,000
25,932
35,340
25,932
9,408

Run Numbers Like a Pro

Cash flow return =
=

183

BTCF
Down payment
$9, 408
$70, 000

= 13.44%

Not bad. But say your minimum required return (hurdle rate)
equals 15 percent. What might you do to boost your cash ﬂow returns?
For starters, you could try to get the lender to extend the loan term to 30
years. If successful, your payments (assuming no change in interest rate)
would drop to $24,652 a year; your annual pretax cash ﬂow would increase to $10,688 (35,340 minus 24,652):

Cash flow return =

$10,688
$70,000

= 15.3%

If you don’t like extending the loan term to 30 years, you could try to
push the lender down to a 7.625 percent interest rate. In that case, your
mortgage payments (25 years) would total $25,102 per year. Your cash
ﬂow would equal $10,237 (35,340 – 25,102):

Cash flow return =

$10,237
$70,000

= 14.28%

Oops, that lower interest rate won’t quite do it. But as an enterprising investor, you’ve got a number of other options:
◆ Try for an even lower interest rate (7.5 percent would work).
◆ Ask the seller to take back an interest-only balloon note for ﬁve

years at 7.0 percent in the amount of, say, $20,000.
◆ Negotiate a lower price for the property.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

184

◆ Switch from a 25-year, ﬁxed-rate mortgage to a 7.0 percent 5/20

adjustable-rate mortgage.This tactic would work especially well if
you planned to sell (or exchange) the property within ﬁve years.
◆ Look for reasonable and certain ways to boost the property’s net
income. Increase rent collections, raise occupancy. Cut expenses.
◆ Agree to pay the seller a higher price in exchange for owner ﬁnancing on terms more favorable (lower interest rate, lower
down payment) than a bank would offer.
You ﬁnd a
property. You
negotiate and
structure a good
deal.

Any or all of these techniques could work. Experiment with the numbers and negotiate some mutually agreeable solution. As an investor in real
estate, the “market” will never provide you a return.
You earn your return based upon the price, terms of
ﬁnancing, property improvements, and market strategy that you put together.

Don’t Settle for Market Rates of Appreciation: Create Value
But here’s even better news. You never need to passively accept market
rent increases or property appreciation rates of just 3 percent, 5 percent,
or even 7 percent a year. You can use your entrepreneurial skills to study the market, improve the propCreate your own
erty, develop a competitive edge for your target
market, and locate communities and neighborhoods
appreciation.
that are poised to “beat the market.” Any or all of
these efforts will quickly shoot up your net worth.
Yes, I love to buy properties that score high on all of the value
benchmarks that you’ve just learned. But just as much—and sometimes
more—I love to buy properties that include large doses of hidden value,
value that I can bring to life through market-researched, proﬁt-yielding
improvements. In fact, in sellers’ markets (when too many buyers are
chasing too few properties), it’s often easier to discover hidden value
begging to be realized than it is to ﬁnd properties that can be bought at
below-market prices.

C H A P T E R

13

How You Can Greatly
Increase the Value of
Your Investment Property

Want to immediately jump your net worth by $25,000, $100,000,
$250,000, or more? Then put to work this simple method for ﬁguring out
the value of a property:
Value =

Net Operating Income (NOI)
Capitalization Rate (R)

To refresh your memory, let’s go through another example. Assume that
you ﬁnd a six-unit apartment building. This rental property currently
brings in a net income (NOI) of $48,000 a year. Based on talks with real
estate agents, appraisers, and other investors, you ﬁgure this property “as
is”should sell with a cap rate of 9 percent (.09). With these two numbers
you can calculate the “as is” value of these six units at $533,333.
48, 000 (NOI)
= $533, 333 (V)
.09 (R)

If you could somehow boost that property’s NOI to say, $60,000 a year,
you would jump its value by 25 percent. You would quickly gain another
$133,000 in equity.
185

186

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

60, 000 (new NOI)
= $666, 666 (V)
.09 (R)

Even better, if you can reduce the riskiness of the property, you might be
able to justify a lower cap rate than .09, say, 8 percent (.08). With a
higher NOI and a lower cap rate, the value of that property skyrockets
from the original $533,333 up to $750,000—an immediate gain in value
of $212,000.
Are such large increases in value possible within a period of 6 to 18
months? Absolutely! Why? Because many owners of small investment
properties still think of themselves as “landlords” (with the accent on
“lord”) and their residents merely as “renters” who don’t deserve “customer care.” But just the opposite is true. Today (and in the future) market conditions require savvy investors to treat their tenants as valued
customers—not serfs.

Search for Competitive Advantage
Most small investors mismanage their properties because they do not intelligently survey and inspect competing properties.
Without this market knowledge, they can’t strategiBoost your
cally customize their properties to make them stand
out from other rentals. In other words, these ownerproperty values by
investors fail to monitor their competitors and they
outperforming
fail to carefully adapt their market and management
your competition.
strategies to wow their customers (tenants, buyers).

Your Properties Should Stand Above the Competition
As a mental starting point for creating value, remember, never think of
yourself as a landlord. Never deﬁne what you do as
“owning rental properties.” Instead, think of yourNever think of
self as providing your customers with a product
(housing) that stands out and stands above your
yourself as a
competitors. If you adopt this modern attitude,
landlord.
your proﬁts (and the value of your properties) will
shoot far above average for two reasons:

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

187

1. Better resident relations. The residents of your properties
will reward you with lower turnover, fewer problems, and
higher rents.
2. Alert to opportunities. With a customer-oriented, constantimprovement attitude, you will consistently look for and come
up with ideas that will add value to your property operations.

A Strategy of Your Own
Good management and marketing depend on good knowledge of competing properties and resident (tenant) preferences. You want to create
a speciﬁc strategy that will yield you the highest proﬁts. Certainly, you
can read a dozen books on “landlording” and most of them will give you
a precise list of do’s and don’ts that may cover every topic from applications to waterbeds. While ideas from these books often prove suggestive, never accept them as the ﬁnal word.
What works today may not work tomorrow. What works in Peoria
may not go over in Paducah. What works in a tight
rental market may prove less effective in a highAdapt your
vacancy market. What works best with HUD Section
8 tenants may actually turn away those upscale
property to your
young professionals who live in your more expenlocal market.
sive buildings. Should you accept pets, smokers, or
college students? It all depends.
Offer your selected target market of renters (or buyers) the value
proposition that they will prefer—yet, at the same time, a value proposition that fattens your bottom line (NOI). In practice, you can ﬁnd that
proﬁt-maximizing value proposition by knowing the competition. Then
create your own competitive advantage.
Here’s the $100,000 question: What can you actually do to boost
your property’s investment value? Here are some ideas.

First, Verify Actual Rent Collections, Not Merely Rental Rates
Before you buy, verify. Too many new investors merely accept an owner’s
rent ﬁgures and then subtract a so-called standard 5 percent vacancy factor. In truth, many property owners do not collect 95 percent of their
scheduled rents—even if they achieve 95 percent occupancy. To verify

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

188

rents, ﬁrst verify the lease rates the tenants have agreed to pay. Second,
realistically estimate vacancy and collection losses. Your proﬁts, and the
building’s value, rest upon bankable funds, not leaky leases. If you overpay for a property because you overestimate the property’s current rent
collections, you are trying to increase value in a headwind.

Talk with Tenants
Prior to buying any investment property, I always talk with a sampling of
the renters who live in the building. This practice serves four purposes.
◆ Identify problems in the building.
◆ Identify problems with tenants.
◆ Verify lease application data.
◆ Generate ideas for improvement.

Problems in the Building
“Not enough parking.”“Too much noise.”“The bills for heat and air are
outrageous—$277 last month.”“These walls are paper thin.”“This place
lacks security. We’ve had three break-ins during the past six months.”
“The closets in this apartment are too small, and there’s no place for
long-term storage.”“No place to park or store my boat—or even my bicycle.”“Cockroaches, ugh. This place is crawling with cockroaches.”
To really learn about a building, talk with the tenants. You can gain
valuable insights by asking tenants,“Tell me, what don’t you like around
here?”On occasion, the tenants will speak well of the
building (or its owner). But more often they like to
Ask tenants, “What
complain. Will you hear glowing praise? Not likely.
Tenants know that too many good comments might
don’t you like?”
bring on a rent increase.

Problems with Tenants
Bad tenants can ruin a potentially good building. If some tenants create
hassles for others, you want to know about it before you offer to buy the

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

189

property. Problems within a building and problems with disruptive tenants can stir up vacancies, turnover, and rent collections. Solve these
problems and you create value.

Verify Lease and Application Data
Leases and tenant application data do not always portray the true facts
about a property’s tenants. Do you realize that some sellers actually
show beginning investors phantom leases with false data? Aside from
outright fraud, your talks with tenants might reveal rent concessions that
aren’t recorded in the written ﬁle that the sellers gave you to review. You
might also ﬁnd that some tenants are subletting their units. Or maybe
they’ve let additional friends and family move in
with them.
Closely review the
Before you buy, put together a rent roll that’s as
accurate as possible. Otherwise, both your NOI and
rent roll.
cap rate (risk rate) ﬁgures may err.

Generate Ideas for Improvement
Whenever you value a building, divide the “problems” you ﬁnd into two
piles: (1) economically unsolvable and (2) opportunity-laden. As your
talks with tenants reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the “as is” property, you’re valuing the
Critique the
property as it stands today. But at the same time,
you’re constantly rolling ideas through your mind.
property, but also
How might you proﬁtably improve the property tolook for
morrow? Through the eyes of a critical buyer, you
opportunities to
ﬁnd faults and proﬁt-draining negatives. Through
the alert eyes of an entrepreneurial investor, you vicreate value.
sualize ways to turn a lump of coal into a diamond.

Set Your Rents with Market Savvy
Many owners of rental properties devote far too little effort to ﬁguring out
the rental rates that they should charge for their units. They underprice.

190

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

They overprice. They don’t make rent-enhancing improvements. They fail
to adequately segment their tenants. They spend too much money on ineffective advertising. They devote too little time and money to target marketing. If they experience high vacancies, they blame a soft market. If they
experience low vacancies,they pride themselves on their skill as a landlord.
All in all, these mistakes (and many others) ﬂow from the same
source. Property owners just don’t realize the great proﬁts they’re missing when they set their rents to reﬂect their own
personal whim or arbitrary judgment rather than
market reality.
Mispricing your
Think of missed opportunities like this. You
rents will cost you
own a 12-unit building. You underprice each unit by
dearly.
$25 a month. The cap rate is .09 (9 percent). How
much does this underpricing error cost you?
Lost income

= $25 ¥ 12 units ¥ 12 months
= $3, 600 per year

Lost building value =

$3, 600
.09

= $40, 000

You’ve lost $40,000 of value just by underpricing $25 per month!
Move that rent shortfall up to $50 or $100 a month, and you lose
$100,000 to $200,000. Make no mistake: Underpricing rents can cost
you a bundle of money. Overpricing, too, can also cost you plenty. By trying to charge too much, your vacancies, turnovers, advertising costs, conversion rates (meaning that you must show the property 15 to 20 times
before you ﬁnd a willing tenant), malicious tenant damage, and bad debts
will probably shoot up. Before you set your rent rates, inspect competing properties. Acquire personal knowledge of competing properties
and competitor pricing.Then you will be able to adopt a pricing strategy
that maximizes your net income (NOI) and property value.

Your Apartment Checklist
If rental houses and apartments were like cans of Campbell’s tomato
soup or bottles of Coca-Cola, you could expect every unit to rent for the

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

191

same price. You could discover an actual “market” rent level. But, in fact,
houses and apartment buildings differ in dozens of ways that their potential tenants ﬁnd appealing or unappealing. Mentally tour properties. What
do you see? How do the properties differ with respect to these features?
❑ Views
❑ Energy usage/efﬁciency
❑ Square footage
❑ Natural light
❑ Ceiling height
❑ Quiet/noisiness
❑ Parking
❑ Room count
❑ Appliances (quality, quantity)
❑ Landscaping
❑ Quality of ﬁnishes
❑ Heat/air conditioning
❑ Decks/patios/balconies
❑ Cleanliness
❑ Carpeting/ﬂoor coverings
❑ Electrical outlets
❑ Emotional appeal
❑ Color schemes/aesthetics

❑ Living area ﬂoor plan
❑ Closet space
❑ Storage space
❑ Kitchen functionality
❑ Kitchen pizzazz
❑ Entryway convenience
❑ Tenant demographics
❑ Tenant lifestyles, attitudes
❑ Lighting
❑ Security
❑ Laundry facilities
❑ Fireplace
❑ Physical condition
❑ Window coverings
❑ Types/style of windows
❑ Image/reputation
❑ Furniture

And this checklist doesn’t even mention other important tenant concerns such as the amount of the security deposit (total move-in cash),
the terms of the lease, the quality of the management, and last but
far from least, location. Before you think through all of these possible differences, you can’t intelligently say that your twobedroom, two-bath units should rent for $675 a
month. First, you want to compare and contrast
Proﬁt-maximizing
your units feature by feature to a broad sample of
investors pay
competing properties.
attention to every
With good competitive information about
detail of their
property features and rent levels, you not only improve your ability to evaluate your property. Just as
properties.
important, you prime your mind to spot opportunities to increase its value.

192

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

Give the Interior a Martha Stewart Makeover
As you walk into the unit, are you met with a bland neutrality? Do you
see faded paint, scuff marks, outdated color schemes, cheap hollowcore doors, nail holes in the walls, worn carpeting, torn linoleum, oldfashioned light ﬁxtures, cracked wall switch plates, or stained toilets,
bathtubs, and sinks? If you answer yes to any or all of these questions,
great! You’ve found the easiest path to creating value.

Pay Special Attention to Kitchens and Baths
To really wow your potential tenants, bring in Martha Stewart to redo
the kitchens and bathrooms. Flip through the pages of kitchen and bath
magazines. Look for that right combination of materials and colors that
will create a light, bright, cheerful, and inviting look. Eliminate those
harvest-gold appliances, the chipped and stained sinks, and that cracked
glass in the shower door.
As you inspect these key rooms, focus on each of the following features for at least 30 seconds:
❑ Floors
❑ Ceilings
❑ Sinks
❑ Toilet bowl
❑ Windows and window sills
❑ Electrical outlet plates
❑ Lighting

❑ Faucets
❑ Walls
❑ Cabinets
❑ Cabinet and drawer handles
❑ Appliances
❑ Counter tops

By focusing for 30 seconds on each feature of these rooms, you will
notice everything that blends together to give these rooms their overall
feel. Throughout the entire apartment or house, details count. But they
especially count in the kitchens and bathrooms. The right pizzazz in the
kitchens and bathrooms can transform a ho-hum
unit into a showplace.
How much will this transformation cost? If
Focus gives you
you’ve recently spent $25,000 to remodel your own
the ability to see
kitchen, you may think pizzazz in a rental unit
would run you into the poorhouse. Not true. You
what others miss.
can accomplish wonders with an outlay of between

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

193

$2,000 and $5,000. Replacing sinks, hardware, toilet bowls, and toilet
seats requires relatively little money. As to the cabinetry itself, often a
lower-cost reﬁnish (not a full replacement) can work wonders.

Cleanliness Generates Proﬁts
Do you want to attract tenants who will care for your properties? Then
thoroughly clean the units as if a drill sergeant were about to perform a
white-glove inspection. Do not think “rental property.” Think “home.”
Clean everywhere. Remove the dirt, dust, cobwebs, and dead bugs from all corners, baseboards,
Clean units attract
light ﬁxtures, and shelving. Pull out all kitchen drawers. Dump the bread crumbs and other accumulated
clean tenants.
debris. Make sure all windows and mirrors sparkle
and shine. Look closely for grime in the shower and
shower door tracks. Scrape the rust out of the medicine cabinets and repaint where necessary. Eliminate all odors. Each unit should not only
look fresh and clean, it should smell fresh and clean.

Natural Light and Views
If your units seem dark, brighten them up. In addition to color schemes,
add windows or skylights. If you’re lucky, you might ﬁnd one of those
older buildings with 10-foot ceilings—now reduced to 8 feet via suspended acoustical tile. For a reason unknown to me (energy conservation?), dropped ceilings became popular in the
1960s and 1970s. Today, they’re considered ugly and
Create a view with
outdated. Rip out those dropped ceilings. Your
rooms will seem larger and brighter. Also, in rooms
landscaping.
with high ceilings, you can install clerestory windows to bring in more light.
For ﬁrst-ﬂoor rooms, see if you can enhance the view with landscaping or fencing. To create views for upper-story units, think long
term. Plant trees. When ﬁnancially feasible, you might create a view by
moving a window. Ugly views turn off most tenants. Pleasant views provide good selling points. Do as much as you can to give your tenants better views than dumpsters, parking lots, high-trafﬁc streets, and the
rooftops of other buildings.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

194

Special Touches
For those special aesthetic touches, try chair railings, wallpaper borders,
upgraded door handles, paneled doors, and wood stains (instead of
paint). Upgrades in light ﬁxtures, too, can help you add pizzazz. The
newer forms of track lighting seem to be gaining popularity for both
form and function.
You can get ideas for special touches from home decorating and remodeling magazines. Also visit new model homes and newer upscale
apartment, townhouse, and condominium developments. Don’t go too far with special touches or you
Create a few “gee
will cut into your proﬁtability. Still, a few “gee whiz”
features will help rental prospects differentiate and
whiz” features.
remember your units.

Safety, Security, and Convenience
Often safety and convenience go together as with the number and capacity of electrical outlets. Older buildings, especially, lack enough outlets and amperage to safely handle all of the modern household’s plug-in
appliances, computers, printers, fax machines, and audio/video home entertainment centers. Many renters don’t notice this type of functional
obsolescence until after they move into a unit. Then they “solve” the
problem with adapter plugs and roaming extension cords. If the unit
lacks electrical capacity, plan an upgrade.

Other Issues of Safety and Security
Get an expert to
assess the risks of
an
environmentally
suspect property.

Other safety issues include smoke alarms, carbon
monoxide detectors, ﬁre escape routes, door locks,
ﬁrst-ﬂoor windows, and ﬁrst-ﬂoor sliding glass
doors. Environmental health hazards may exist because of lead paint, asbestos, or formaldehyde—any
of which may be found in building materials used in
construction (or remodeling) prior to 1978. When
buying, insist on seller disclosures about the pres-

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

195

ence of any of these hazards. If the building is suspect, don’t buy it without advice of an environmental expert.
Costly remedial improvements in these areas will seldom pay off
with much higher rents. You can, though, proﬁtably deal with environmental issues by negotiating a large discount in your purchase price. As
to security against break-ins, make sure all windows and doors lock securely and cannot be jimmied with a credit card (as in the TV shows), or
even a screwdriver. Deadbolt locks are best. Entry-door peepholes also
give tenants a sense of security.
In our criminal-infested world, tenants want to feel safe in their
homes. If doors, door locks, and windows seem ﬂimsy, many tenants
won’t rent the unit—regardless of its other oohs and aahs.

Stairs, Carpets, and Bathrooms
Pay particular attention to any steps or stair railings that may be loose or
dangerous. Frayed carpets and bathtubs that lack no-slip bottoms and
handrails can provoke falls. Remedy every safety or security hazard
within the property. Even when a repair doesn’t add
to your rent collections, it will protect your tenants.
Unsafe properties
It will reduce the chance that you could end up on
the wrong end of a tenant’s lawsuit for damages.
invite lawsuits.

Rightsize the Rooms
Have you ever walked into a house and found some rooms too large and
others too small? It seems today that in many houses builders construct
a huge great room along with a huge master bedroom and bath, and then
ﬁnish off the house with three or four dinky bedrooms. The house lacks
a sense of proportion (which evidently is what some homebuyers like).

Create a Sense of Proportion
What sense of proportion should a house or an apartment unit display?
The answer varies by tenant segment, price range, and timing (because

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

196

tastes today differ from those of 10, 20, or 30 years ago). As people and
property change, opportunities arise for you to notice possibilities for
improvement. Buy an out-of-style building, then rearrange the internal
ﬂoor plan to better appeal to the intended market segment of renters or
buyers.

Postwar Units Are Modernized
I once bought an older eight-unit apartment building. It had been built
in 1949 to house the veterans of World War II and their fast-growing families. The units were arranged in a “3BR/1BTH” style (common to that period) with one moderate-sized bedroom for the parents and two small
bedrooms for those recently born baby boomers. In the early 1990s
(when I bought the property), most tenants looked at the units and said,
“Ugh, no way could we live here.”
Because the owner had trouble keeping the units rented, I got a
bargain price. To create value, I split up one of the small bedrooms. I
used half of that space to enlarge the other small bedroom, and half to
add a second bathroom. I then rented the building to tenants looking to
share their rentals with a roommate. Rent collections jumped by $175
per unit per month—a very proﬁtable return on my investment and renovations.

Create More Storage
Self-storage (mini-warehouses) now represent one of the fastest growing
types of properties in the United States. We’ve all become pack rats.
“Throw it away? Why I might need that sometime.”
Talk with tenants. Talk with homeowners. Many will tell you the
same thing. “I like my home, but we lack space for storage.” If you want
to add appeal to your rental houses and apartment units, add storage
space. To do so, think about storage in three ways:
◆ Bring dead space to life.
◆ Increase the capacity of existing space.
◆ Create new storage space in basements or attics. Install storage

sheds.

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

197

Bring Dead Space to Life
Let me ﬁrst illustrate with an example that may seem trivial, but it never
fails to mildly impress prospective tenants. Look in the cabinet under
your kitchen sink. You will see a small gap between the front panel of
the cabinet above the door and the sink. In other words, dead space.
How might you use that space? Install a small pull-down compartment
to stow away soap, sponge, and scrubbing pads. No more sink clutter.
Whenever I show this little innovation to other people, I always get an
approving response.
Okay, I admit, it’s trivial. But it illustrates the point. All houses and
apartments include generous amounts of dead spaces (large and small)
that you can bring to life.
◆ Under stairs and stairwells
◆ Bay windows with storage built under the window seat and

under the outside of the window
◆ Garden windows
◆ On the tops of kitchen cabinets
◆ Dead-end cabinets
◆ Walls suitable for shelving
◆ Recessed storage between studs (as with an in-wall medicine

chest)
◆ Kitchen hanging bars for pots and pans

These ideas merely sample the possibilities. If you go through any house
or apartment and ask,“Where are the dead spaces that I can bring to life
for purposes of storage?” you will ﬁnd them.

Increase the Capacity of Existing Storage Space
My favorite examples to illustrate how to achieve “more with less” come
from the California Closet Company (CCC). As ideas from this innovative
ﬁrm have proven, you can double (or triple) your storage capacity without adding even one square inch of new space. Simply reorganize and redesign the raw space that already exists. Although founded as a closet
company, CCC now redesigns garages, ofﬁces, workshops, and kitchens.
Put these same reorganizing principles to work and you’ll really wow
your prospective tenants.You will give your rentals a sought-after beneﬁt.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

198

Let the California
Closet Company
guide your ideas to
add space for
storage.

You could also make some space serve multiple purposes. The most common way to multipurpose is through use of a Murphy bed that folds up
against a wall. A Murphy bed not only adds usable
ﬂoor space, it also opens up the possibility of shelving alongside the bed. You can either use the wall
cavity or create a new, larger cavity by bringing a
new wall out even with the Murphy bed.

Check Noise Levels
No one likes noise. Before you invest, test the units for soundprooﬁng.
Will noise from a television or stereo carry throughout the house or
apartment? When you inspect properties, bring along a portable radio.
Test various rooms. Turn up the volume. Do the walls provide enough
soundprooﬁng? Families and roommate tenants want privacy and quiet.
If your rental property fails to offer quiet, your units will lose appeal.

Check for Neighborhood Noise
Just as important, will your tenants hear neighbors or neighborhood
noise from inside their units? Again, people pay for quiet. They discount
heavily for noise.
No doubt, you’ll typically hear more noise in
neighborhoods ﬁlled with apartment buildings. But
Check noise levels
single-family neighborhoods can also suffer from
loud stereos, barking dogs, and unmufﬂed car enat various times.
gines. Does the drum corps of the nearby high
school practice outside three hours a day? When
possible, visit the property during periods of high trafﬁc or peak noise.
Don’t assume that a neighborhood offers peace and quiet. Verify.

Ask for Written Disclosures
Seek written disclosures from the seller of the property. Talk with tenants and neighbors. Find out whether anyone has tried to enforce quiet

How You Can Greatly Increase the Value of Your Investment Property

199

by complaining to city government, a homeowners association, or by ﬁling a nuisance suit. If you invest in the property, could you effectively invoke noise ordinances against these noisy tenants (or homeowners)
who live nearby? Can you add features to the property (soundproof windows, heavy doors, more wall
Seek disclosures
insulation, or tall, thick hedges) to reduce the noise
that arises from either outside or inside of the buildabout noise.
ing? When you suppress noise, you create value.

Overall Livability
Never think “rental property.” Always remember, you are providing people a home. As you design the overall appeal of a property, imagine how
the units will be for your intended target market of residents.
◆ Do the units offer enough square footage?
◆ Are the units spotlessly clean, fresh, and bright? Do they smell

clean and fresh?
◆ Do the room counts and room sizes represent the most prof-

itable use of space?
◆ Do the aesthetics of the units excite with emotional appeal?
◆ Does the unit bring in enough natural light?
◆ What views will the tenants see from inside the units looking

out?
◆ Do the units offer generous amounts of closets and storage

space?
◆ Are the units quiet?
◆ Will tenants feel safe and secure within the units?
◆ Do the kitchens and baths offer eye-pleasing pizzazz?

Experience proves that homes rent faster and enjoy lower vacancies than mere rental houses and apartments. Give your tenants something special. You’ll earn higher proﬁts. You’ll boost the value of your
properties.

C H A P T E R

14

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost
the Value of Your Properties

You’re now well on your way to create instant wealth. Your great livable
units sparkle with pizzazz and emotional appeal. These units will keep
your building full of tenants who will gladly pay premium prices.
Yet, before sharp interiors can woo your prospective tenants, you
must get them to keep their appointments to inspect the homes that you
are offering. Nothing will accomplish this goal better than curb appeal.

Create Strikingly Attractive Curb Appeal

Position your
property with a
well-kept
outstanding
exterior.
200

You can write an award-winning newspaper ad that
will make your phone ring. But your Madison Avenue talents will fall ﬂat when great tenants pull up
in front of the building and immediately begin to
ask themselves,“What are we doing here? This place
is nothing like I imagined. Do you think we should
go in?”
“Nah, why waste our time? This place is a
dump. We shouldn’t even think about living here.”

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

201

Your Building Is Your Best Advertisement
More than likely, hundreds (maybe thousands) of people will pass by
your property each week. What will they notice about the property? Will
it appear as that run-down rental of the neighborhood, a nondescript
plain Jane? Or will it cause passersby to remark,“Isn’t that building kept
up well? Those ﬂower gardens and brick walkways seem to reach out
and invite us to come inside.”
If you want your building to generate more income, create an inviting exterior. Create award-winning publicity with knockout curb appeal.
Not only will an attractive, well-kept exterior appeal to a better class of
tenants, it will also increase tenant satisfaction and reduce turnover. To
create strikingly attractive curb appeal, make these improvements:
1. Clean up the grounds. When you ﬁrst take over a property,
get busy with a meticulous cleanup of the grounds, parking
area, and walkways. Pick up trash, accumulated leaves, and
fallen tree branches. Build a fence to block that view of the
dumpsters. Tell tenants to remove their inoperable cars from
the parking lots, parking spaces, or driveways. If abandoned
cars are parked on the street, ask the city government to post
them and tow them.
2. Yard care and landscaping. Tenants and homebuyers alike
love a manicured lawn, ﬂower-lined walkways, mulched
shrubs, and ﬂower gardens. With landscaping, you can turn an
ordinary building into a showcase property. With landscaping
you can create privacy, manufacture a gorgeous view looking
out from the inside of the units, or eliminate an ugly view. Especially if you’re looking at a holding period of three to ﬁve
years (or longer), put in those small plants, shrubs, ﬂower gardens, and hedges now. When you sell, those mature plantings
will easily earn you a return of at least $10 for each $1 the
landscaping cost you.
3. Sidewalks, walkways, and parking areas. Replace or repair major cracks and buckling that may appear in your sidewalks and parking areas. Remove all grass or weeds growing
through the cracks. Edge all of the areas where the yard abuts
concrete or asphalt. Neatness pays. Overgrown grass and
weeds really stain the curb appeal of a rental property—

202

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

precisely because these types of blemishes signal that the
property is a rental.
4. Fences, lampposts, and mailboxes. For purposes of good
looks, privacy, and security, quality fencing can enhance the
value of a property. Just as certainly, a rusted, rotted, or tumbledown fence blemishes the property; likewise rusty lampposts with broken glass light ﬁxtures. For a nice decorative
touch, add a white picket fence or a low stone fence in the
front of the building. If the building houses a cluster of mailboxes, make sure the mail area is kept neat and the mailbox
lobby or porch area present a good ﬁrst impression.
5. The exterior of the building. Now, turn your attention to
the exterior of the building itself. The building must signal to
prospective tenants that you take good care of your property.
Paint where necessary or desirable. Repair wood rot. Clean
roof and gutters. Next, imagine ways to enhance the building’s appearance with shutters, ﬂower boxes, a dramatic front door and entryway, and new (or
additional) windows. Can you add contrasting color
Clean up the
for trim or accent the building design with architecmailbox area and
tural details? How well does (or could) the propkeep it clean.
erty’s exterior distinguish it from other comparably
priced rental properties?

Here’s How You Can Achieve That Dazzling Curb Appeal
Unless you’re creatively gifted, you may not be able to spontaneously
generate great ideas for improving a property. Creative design certainly
doesn’t come easily to me. I rank high among the artistically challenged.
So here’s how I compensate for my dull artistic vision.
I carry a camera in the glovebox of my car.
Often when I see a building or yard that displays
eye-catching features, I snap a picture. Over time,
To generate ideas,
I’ve put together a large collection of photos.
snap photos of
When I’m trying to ﬁgure out how to give a proprole-model
erty strikingly attractive curb appeal, I pull out
some of these photos and select model properties
properties.
to compare feature to feature with my investment

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

203

property. Comparing better to worse always brings forth a rush of
value-creating ideas.
You don’t even have to rely on your own snapshots. Dozens of
“house and home” types of books and magazines ﬁll the shelves of grocers and bookstores. I regularly buy these publications. Their articles
and photos will deﬁnitely enlighten your creative thinking and aesthetic
sensibilities.

Look closely for
ways to generate

Collect More than Rent

extra income.

When you review the income statements of apartment buildings, you will sometimes come across a
line-item entry called “other income.”These amounts
may include money earned from laundry machines, parking, storage
lockers, or various services and amenities.
1. Laundry. Ideally, your rental units will each include space for
washer and dryer hookups. But if they don’t, look for space
somewhere else on the property where you can install coinoperated (actually electronic card-operated) washers and dryers. Without on-premises laundry facilities, your building will
suffer a serious competitive disadvantage. Today, most tenants
have been raised in homes with washers and dryers. These
tenants do not want to cart their washing to a laundromat.
2. Parking. If parking spots are scarce in the neighborhood
where you own properties, consider an extra charge for parking (or perhaps an extra charge for a second car). Do not arbitrarily give one parking space per unit. Some tenants may not
have cars. Others may be willing to park on the street. By pricing your scarce parking separately from the units, those tenants who want it most will pay more.
3. Build storage lockers. Back to the idea of adding storage
space. You create value any time you can squeeze some profitable use out of every nook and cranny within the building,
and within every square foot of the site. One such proﬁtable
use is storage lockers. Does the property include an attic, basement, or crawl space where you could carve out room for
more storage? You can easily rent such lockers for $10 to $20

204

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

per month. Generally, you can achieve payback in less than four
years. If no existing space within the building can serve this
purpose, install several of those prefabricated storage sheds.
4. Add other amenities or services. Whenever you take over
a property, think through a list of services or amenities that
you could provide (preferably at a price) that would increase
your revenue and strengthen your competitive edge. Consider services such as cleaning, day care, or transportation. In
terms of amenities, would your tenants appreciate (and pay
for) a swimming pool, tennis courts, racquetball (or squash)
courts, a ﬁtness center, or a study room? As the widely known
investor, Craig Hall, advises, “Keep an open and searching
mind. Seek out things you can do to attract and satisfy the best
tenants for each speciﬁc investment.” Amen!

Convert a Garage, Attic, or Basement
As you shop for properties, look for those with an
attic, garage, or basement that you can convert to
quality living space. I emphasize the word quality
Add quality space,
because beginning investors often convert as
not space that
cheaply as possible. As a result, their ﬁnished spaces
looks weird.
not only look cheap, they may lack natural light, the
ceilings may hang too low, or the newly created ﬂoor
plans and trafﬁc patterns may seem weird, convoluted, or garbled.
In contrast, savvy improvers who design and ﬁnish their conversions to wow potential tenants or buyers can and do make serious
money for their efforts. To earn good proﬁts, your space conversion
should achieve the following objectives:
◆ Fit the needs of the target market
◆ Please the senses
◆ Integrate the new with the overall plan and design of the exist-

ing property

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

205

Target Market Needs
Ask yourself, “What

When you remodel only for personal use, it’s OK to
convert your basement into a recreation room that
most for?”
mimics the look of your favorite tavern. For profitable remodeling, though, aim to please your target
market. What type of highly valued space can you
offer that competing properties lack? A dynamite home ofﬁce, a study, a
playroom for the kids, a workout area, a library, an entertainment center,
a seductive master bedroom and bath? Think visually. What can you
imagine?

would tenants pay

Aesthetics: Pleasing to the Senses
Basement conversions often fail because they lack
windows and give off that damp, musty odor so
common to below-ground living areas. To overcome
Can you make a
these problems, use window wells and carve-outs to
basement seem
bring in natural light. To eliminate the musty smell
and dampness, use high-quality sealants and fresh air
homey?
ventilation. Follow the same general ideas for attic
and garage conversions. You want these ﬁnished
areas to look, live, feel, and smell as good as the rest of the house. You
want light, height, warmth, and color. You do not want to merely tack up
cheap paneling, hang acoustical tile ceilings, or lay down a roll of indooroutdoor carpeting. Romance the space. Think pizzazz!

Integrate the Conversion into the House

Well-designed
conversions do
not announce
themselves as
conversions.

When you evaluate houses for their conversion potential, don’t just think of added living space as an
independent area. Work to expand the total integrated living area of the house. The best conversions
ﬂow smoothly to and from the original living areas.
Think access and ﬂow. How well can you blend the
conversion into a natural trafﬁc pattern?
As much as possible, avoid signaling to your
prospects, “Now entering a converted garage

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

206

(basement or attic).” Or “Watch your head. The ceiling’s a little low in
here.” Look for properties that are currently designed with potential for
an integrated addition. A well-planned conversion can easily pay back
two dollars (or more) for every dollar invested.

Create an Accessory Apartment
Variously called in-law suites, basement suites,
garage apartments, mortgage helpers, or accessory
apartments pay
apartments, these separate living units can easily
pay back their cost many times over. Depending on
back large returns.
the city and neighborhood, an accessory apartment
can bring in rents that range anywhere from $250 to
$750 per month. And unless you build from scratch, you can typically
create desirable space for as little as $5,000 and certainly no more than
$15,000.
In other words, viewed in terms of return on investment, $10,000
in renovation costs can often generate a rental income of $4,000 to
$6,000 per year. You can search the world over and never ﬁnd as much
return for so little risk.
Accessory

Create a Special Purpose Use
You may ﬁnd that renovating toward some special
purpose use can generate a premium resale price or
rental rate. Most ﬁxer-upper investors go generic. In
features of a
return, they receive a generic proﬁt. But when you
property to niche
renovate toward the speciﬁc needs of a bullseye
segment of seniors, the disabled, children, home
segment of buyers
businesses, college students, or any other special(tenants).
ized target of tenants (buyers), you favorably differentiate your product.
To discover a proﬁtable niche, talk with people at social service
agencies, hospitals, and local colleges. Imagine the special needs of single parents, multigenerational households, hobbyists, roommates, group
homes, and shelters. Always stay alert to markets where demand runs
Tailor unique

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

207

strong and supply falls short. Whereas most run-of-the-mill investors
know how to ﬁx up a property, entrepreneurs search for a special niche
of customers.Then they tailor the features of the property to perfectly ﬁt
that target market.

Change the Use of a Property
Apartments with new life as condominiums . . . gas
stations now operating as retail outlets . . . old
value, convert to a
homes converted to ofﬁce space . . . what was once
more proﬁtable
farm acreage is now a sprawling urban shopping
center. These properties are examples of adaptive
use.
use of both land and buildings brought about by a
city’s growth and change.
Conversions provide boundless opportunities for the creative investor. Converting an old house located in the downtown area can earn
good proﬁts. Ofﬁce space sometimes rents at twice the rental rate of
housing. The opposite also can occur. Recently, in London, housing
prices have climbed so high that all types of retail, warehouse, and ofﬁces are being converted to apartments.
To maximize

Condominium Conversion
To plan for a condo conversion, study the local area to learn the sales
prices of comparable condo units. If you can purchase a similar apartment building at a low enough price, renovate and sell the converted
units as condos to earn a proﬁt.
Here’s how you might calculate the potential proﬁts of converting
rental units into individually owned condominiums for a 16-unit apartment building:
Acquisition price
Rehab at $7,500 per unit
Attorney fees (condo document preparation,
government permitting process, sales contract
preparation, closing document review)
Marketing costs (advertising, sales commissions)

$480,000
120,000

40,000
45,000

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

208

Mortgage interest (12-month renovation and sellout)
Incidentals (architect, interior design, landscaping,
government permits)
Total costs
Cost per unit

50,000
35,000
$770,000
$48,125

In this example, you paid $480,000 ($30,000 per
unit) to acquire this 16-unit rental property. After all
costs of conversion,your total investment increased to
Condo
$770,000 ($48,125 per unit). But these ﬁgures haven’t
conversions can
yet considered proﬁts. If you want to net $10,000 per
offer a risky
unit, you will need to sell the units at a price approaching
$60,000 each (twice your purchase price).
opportunity for
To decide whether such a project is feasible in
quick proﬁts.
your area, research rental properties, condo prices,
and conversion laws. Do some scratch-pad feasibility calculations. If preliminary estimates look promising, talk with an investor, contractor, attorney, or real estate consultant experienced in the
conversion process. With the knowledge gained from these talks (and
perhaps some follow-up research), you can decide whether this investment approach offers you enough proﬁt potential to offset risks such as
cost overruns, slow sales, and bureaucratic delays.

Convert Apartments or Houses to Ofﬁce Space
Sometimes it’s proﬁtable to convert apartments or houses to ofﬁce
space. To mull over this possibility, answer these questions:
1. Is the property in a commercial zone? If not, can you get the
property rezoned?
2. What is the current vacancy rate for ofﬁce space in the area of
the subject property? If too much space is already available,
can you identify an underserved niche?
3. Do you have adequate parking for ofﬁce space? The city may
require one parking space for every 250–500 square feet of
rentable ofﬁce space.
4. How much will it cost to convert? Could you borrow the
money to ﬁnance such a conversion? And, ﬁnally, will the cost,

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

209

legal procedures, and time and effort be worth the eventual
proﬁt you will realize?
Study the property and the market carefully. Thoroughly ﬁgure the ﬁnances of the projected conversion. Keep in tune with the requirements. If you can convert at a reasonable cost and earn a good proﬁt,
take a chance. You’ll also gain valuable experience.
(Don’t forget, for more complex investments, partner with someone who is more experienced. Place the promising property under option or purchase contract with contingencies. Then line up your partner
and proceed.)

Cut Operating Expenses
As a rule of thumb, every dollar you slice from your property’s operating
expenses can add $10 or more to your building’s value. With gains like
that, you should meticulously keep track of all expenses.Then make continuous efforts to reduce or eliminate them. Here are some ideas.

Energy Audits
Nearly all utility companies will help you discover ways to reduce your
gas or electric bills. Some will even audit and inspect your property. Others will provide booklets or brochures and, perhaps, a customer service
department to answer specialized questions. You can also ﬁnd dozens of
articles and books at your local library that discuss energy conservation.
Energy-audit a building before you buy it. Then you can judge beforehand the extent to which you can feasibly reduce these costs.

Maintenance and Repair Costs
Savvy investors also need to reduce or eliminate money-wasting property maintenance and repair expenses. From my experience, I would encourage you to focus on ﬁve things:
1. Low-maintenance houses and apartment buildings.
When shopping to buy, favor those properties that are con-

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

210

2.

3.

4.

5.

structed with materials, HVAC, and ﬁxtures that require less
maintenance. Nothing beats a property that’s built to last with
minimal care. Ditto for yards, shrubs, and landscaping.
Tenant selection. Just as there are both low- and highmaintenance houses and apartment buildings, so too are there
low-maintenance and high-maintenance tenants. Avoid the latter and select the former. Personally, I watch out for chronic
complainers and people who show no “house sense.”
Repair clauses. To further promote tenant responsibility, a
growing number of property owners shift the ﬁrst $50 or
$100 of every repair cost onto their tenants’ shoulders. Also, I
favor high security deposits.
Handyman on call. Nothing eases the drain on your time
and pocketbook as much as having a trustworthy and competent all-around handyman (or persons) to take care of your
property maintenance and repairs.
Preventive maintenance. You inspect and maintain your car.
Do likewise with your investment properties. Anticipate and alleviate when the cost is relatively small. Always ask your maintenance experts how you might replace high-maintenance
items with low-maintenance items.

Property Taxes
“If you think that your property taxes are too high,”writes tax consultant
Harry Koenig,“you’re probably right! Research shows that nearly half of
all properties may be assessed illegally or excessively.” While Koenig
probably overstates the situation somewhat, millions of property owners
do pay more in property taxes than they need to. With just a little attention and planning, you can avoid this trap by taking several precautions:
1. Check the accuracy of your assessed valuation. Usually
tax assessors base their tax calculations on a property’s market value. Look closely at the assessor’s value estimate on your
tax bill. Can you ﬁnd comparable sales of similar properties
that would support a lower value for your property? If so, you
may have grounds to request a tax reduction.
2. Compare your purchase price to the assessor’s estimate of market value. Apart from providing comp sales, if

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

211

you can show the assessor that you recently paid $190,000 for
a property that the assessor appraised at $240,000, you can
make a good case for lower taxes.
3. Look for unequal treatment. Under the law, assessors must
tax properties in a neighborhood in a fair and uniform manner. You can argue for lower taxes by showing that the assessor has assigned lower values to similar nearby properties.
4. Learn tax assessment laws before you improve or rehabilitate a property. The property tax laws of every state
list the types of property improvements that are taxed and the
applicable millage rates. Once you discover the detailed nature of these laws, develop your property improvement strategy to add value without adding taxes.

Gentriﬁcation and Other Value Plays
In large and midsized cities across the United States and Canada, gentriﬁcation has pushed property prices through the roof in neighborhoods
like Kerrisdale (Vancouver), Buckhead (Atlanta), South of Market (San
Francisco), Chicago North Side, Chicago West Side, College Park (Orlando), “M Street” (Dallas), and Coconut Grove (Miami). Most of these
neighborhoods have become name brands.
In earlier years, though, most of these neighborhoods were modest,
even lower-priced neighborhoods. Several areas such as Chicago Near
North and San Francisco South of Market included
industrial and commercial properties.
You can ﬁnd the
In each instance, however, the in-close accessibility of these neighborhoods overwhelmed their
next Buckhead or
negatives. Prior to gaining cachet, these neighborCollege Park.
hoods still gave residents an easy walk, drive, or
commute to major job districts. And their prices
looked dirt cheap when compared with conveniently situated premier
neighborhoods.
Unfortunately for you, many gentriﬁed name brand neighborhoods no
longer represent good value. That’s not to say that these areas won’t show
strong future appreciation. But that, as a rule, their high prices mean that
your rent collections probably won’t cover your mortgage payments plus
property expenses.

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

212

The Good News
But here’s the good news. All across the country, other emerging neighborhoods are poised for turnaround, revitalization, and rapid appreciation of property values. By becoming a neighborhood entrepreneur, you
can score the same large gains that those early investors have earned in
College Park, Near North, and Thorton Park.

Revitalize the Neighborhood
I know that you’ve probably heard it said 100 times: “Buy in the best
neighborhood you can afford. You can change anything about a property
except its location.” At ﬁrst glance, this advice seems plausible. But rethink what the term “neighborhood” actually refers to:
◆ Convenience
◆ Aesthetics
◆ People: attitudes, lifestyles
◆ Legal restrictions
◆ Schools
◆ Taxes/services
◆ Microclimate (weather)
◆ Safety and security
◆ Image/reputation
◆ Affordability

Even Money magazine agrees. In an article on
home buying, Money advised its readers, “With interest
rates sinking, it’s a great time to shop for your
neighborhoods
dream house. . . . You’ll need to seek out the neighdon’t always
borhoods where property values are rising faster
appreciate the
than your community average.” Surprising to many
investors, though, is the fact that the neighborfastest.
hoods where prices are positioned to rise fastest
may not be the most prestigious or well-established
neighborhoods. Often, the largest price increases can be expected in
areas that are poised for turnaround or renewed popularity.
The “best”

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

213

Entrepreneurs Improve Thorton Park (and Make a Killing)
“Florida’s new urban entrepreneurs have the vision to see a bustling district of sushi bars, loft apartments and boutiques on a glass-strewn lot or
rat-infested warehouse,” writes Cynthia Barnett in the August 2001 issue
of Florida Trend.
Phil Rampy is proud to have been one of those early entrepreneurs.
Twelve years ago, Rampy bought a property in the then-shunned Thorton Park neighborhood near trash-strewn Lake Eola
(or as they used to call it, Lake Erie-ola). Today,ThorWhich
ton Park has climbed up the status ladder to rank
among “the trendiest addresses” in Orlando. That
neighborhoods do
$60,000 bungalow that Rampy renovated is now
you believe will
valued at more than $200,000. Although Thorton
gentrify within the
Park still sits on this Earth in the same place it did 10
next decade?
years ago, nearly everything else about this neighborhood has changed.

Many Neighborhoods Show Potential
When you compare neighborhoods, don’t just look at the present. Imagine potential. List all of a neighborhood’s good points. How could you
and other property owners join together to highlight and improve these
features? List the neighborhood’s weak points. How can you and others
eliminate negative inﬂuences? Who can you enlist to promote your
cause? Can you mobilize mortgage lenders, other investors, homeowners, Realtors, not-for-proﬁt housing groups, church leaders, builders, contractors,
preservationists, police, local employers, retail busiLearn what people
nesses, school teachers, principals, community redeare saying about
velopment agencies, elected ofﬁcials, civic groups,
different
and perhaps students, professors, and administrators
of a nearby college or university? People can make a
neighborhoods.
difference.

214

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

How You Can Become a Neighborhood Entrepreneur
You don’t have to live in a big-trouble, inner-city location to become an
urban entrepreneur. You can do it anywhere. No neighborhood is perfect. I suspect that even Beverly Hills and Scarsdale could stand improvement in at least a few ways.
Because neighborhood quality drives up property values and rent
levels, keep yourself alert for ideas to initiate (or join
in) to make the neighborhood a better place to live.
Values jump with
When you simultaneously improve your property
neighborhood
and its neighborhood, you more than double your
proﬁt
potential. Would any of the following suggesimprovements.
tions work for the areas that you’re considering?
Add to Neighborhood Convenience Would a stoplight, wider road,
or new highway interchange improve accessibility to the neighborhood?
Where are the to and fro trafﬁc logjams? How can
they be alleviated? Is the neighborhood served as
Try to attract new
well as it could be by buses and commuter trains?
How about social service transportation? Could you
retailers, coffee
get the vans that pick up seniors or the disabled to
houses, and
place this neighborhood on their route? What about
restaurants.
the traveling bus for the library? Does it stop in the
neighborhood?
Improve Appearances Put together a civic pride organization. Organize a cleanup and ﬁx-up campaign. Plant trees, shrubs, and ﬂowers in
yards and in public areas. Lobby the city to tear
down or eliminate eyesore buildings, grafﬁti, or
trashy areas. Try to reduce on-street parking. Get
Fix-up becomes
abandoned vehicles towed. Enforce environmental
contagious.
regulations against property owners and businesses
that pollute (noise, smoke, odors).
Zoning and Building Regulations Are too many property owners
in the neighborhood splitting up single-family houses and converting
them into apartments? Do too many residents run businesses out of
their homes and garages? Are high-rise or midrise buildings planned
that will diminish livability? Are too many commercial properties encroaching on the area? Then lobby for tighter zoning and building reg-

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

Enlist the help of
the code
enforcers. Change

215

ulations. On the other hand, do areas within the
neighborhood and those nearby make more intense use of properties desirable? Then lobby the
city to rezone the area to apartments or commercial.

the zoning.
Eliminate Neighborhood Nuisances Do one or
more households in the neighborhood make a nuisance of themselves? Junk cars in the driveway, barking dogs, loud
stereos, constant yelling and shouting, out-of-control yards littered with
debris—you and other property owners can force them to clean up
their act or suffer severe and continuing legal penalties.
Pore over your local ordinances and
any pertinent private rules and restrictions.
Rules seldom
Sift through the regulations for zoning, aesthetics, occupancy, use, parking, noise, dispermit nuisances
turbing the peace, health, safety, loitering,
to continue if
drug dealing or possession, extortion, and asneighbors register
sault. You can nearly always ﬁnd some regulatory violations under which you can ﬁle a
complaints.
complaint.
If after receiving a citation the nuisance neighbors continue to offend common decency, a judge can issue
an order to cease and desist (or something similar). Further violations
would then bring the scalawags a citation for contempt of court.They’ve
now angered the judge. Each day the breach persists could rack up multiple ﬁnes, and possibly jail time. In some cases the government will
even remedy the problem—cut the weeds, haul off a junk car—and then
bill the offenders.

Improve school
performance and
watch property
values set new
highs.

Upgrade the Schools The Wall Street
Journal (August 23, 2001, p. A-1) reports
that all across the country “parents and
property owners have become increasingly
aggressive about trying to improve their
public schools.” When you think that in
many areas parents spend $3,000 to $10,000
a year to send their kids to private schools,
why not rechannel those monies and support into the neighborhood schools?

HOW TO INVEST FOR MAXIMUM GAIN

216

Safety and Security In addition to reducing crime, you can bolster
the safety within the neighborhood (especially for children and seniors)
by slowing down or rerouting trafﬁc. In fact, if you can get the city to lay
down speed bumps, you achieve both objectives at the same time. Speed
bumps not only force motorists to let up on the gas pedal, they tell drivers who want to speed that they’d better travel a different street.
You might also try lower posted speed limits and more intense enforcement. In Berkeley, California, neighborhoods lobbied the city to
erect trafﬁc barriers at residential intersections. This effort converted
many formerly through streets into cul-de-sacs.
Insist on the
government
services for which
you and other
property owners
pay taxes.

Lobby the Politicians Property owners pay
taxes. Now insist that you get what you pay for. As
the Berkeley experience proves, when property
owners and neighborhood residents join together
to form a political force, they can push the city
politicos to alleviate trafﬁc problems, clean the
streets, enforce ordinances, upgrade the schools,
beef up police patrols, create parks, and provide
other services that neighborhoods should expect.

Add Luster to Your Image Some good friends of mine used to live in
Miami, Florida, but now they live in the upscale Village of Pinecrest,
Florida. Did they move? No. They and their neighbors persuaded the
post ofﬁce to give them a new address so they could distinguish themselves from that diverse agglomeration known as Miami. As part of their
efforts to create an improved neighborhood, some residents of Sepulveda, California, have formed a new community and renamed it North
Hill. In Maryland, Gaithersburg has changed its
name to North Potomac, attempting to capitalize on
Give your
the prestige of its nearby neighbor. Some residents
of North Hollywood got the ofﬁcial name of part of
neighborhood or
their community changed to Valley Village.“With the
community a new
name change,” says Realtor Jerry Burns, “residents
name.
take more pride in their neighborhood.”
Talk Up the Neighborhood Most people learn about various neighborhoods through word of mouth and articles they read in their local
newspapers. As all good publicists know, you can inﬂuence these methods of “getting the word out.”Talk up the neighborhood to opinion lead-

Twenty-One More Ways to Boost the Value of Your Properties

217

ers. Comment to friends, coworkers, relatives, and acquaintances about
the great improvements of the community.
Convince a reporter to play up the neighborhood’s potential for
turnaround, quality of life, convenience, or affordability. Let everyone
know that the area deserves a better reputation. When you revitalize a
neighborhood, your properties can double or triple in value within just
8 to 10 years.

P A R T

FOUR

Onward and Upward to
Building Wealth

C H A P T E R

15

Win What You Want
through Negotiation
Sometimes you can ﬁnd great deals in real estate. But more often, you
must help create your great deals through negotiation.
Think about it. Whenever you buy or sell,
arrange ﬁnancing, obtain bids from contractors, or
You create great
write out a lease, your skills as a negotiator will inﬂuence
what you get and what you give up. As Herb
deals through
Cohen, the widely respected negotiating trainer,
negotiation.
says,“You can get anything you want in life, but you
must do more than ask. You must negotiate.”
So, in this chapter, you’re going to see how you can win what you
want through negotiation.

How to Deﬁne Win-Win
You’ve probably heard of the negotiating style called win-win. But do
you really know what that negotiating style implies? Most people
don’t—even though they think they do.

Myth Versus Reality
In the fairy-tale world of win-win, you and the other party to the negotiation sit down together, openly share information about each other,
221

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

222

explore options and possibilities, express concerns, focus on goals, and
then come up with a solution that truly satisﬁes both of you. Maybe in
the land of Oz negotiations proceed this smoothly, but not in the real
world.
“Why not?” you ask.
Because in the real world, we all want the best deal we can cut. You
want to pay less. I want you to pay more. I want possession within 30 days; you do not want to give up
Real-world
the property for 90 days. I want you to ﬁnance the
negotiators go for
deal with 10 percent down. You’re insisting on 30
percent. I want to pay you 6 percent interest. You
almost as much as
think I should pay 8 percent. The list of potential
they can get.
deal points for controversy goes on and on.

Forget “What’s Fair”
At least 9 out of every 10 times, the people with whom you negotiate
will try to pull more chips into their own pile and leave you with less.
Likewise (unless you’re sporting a halo), you’ll also want the larger pile.
Maybe this sounds crass, but that’s the way most investors play the negotiating game. Forget “what’s fair” as the deciding arbiter.
To succeed as a wealth-building real estate investor, cast aside your
illusions. To get what you want, you must go well beyond the idealized
view of win-win.

The Real Meaning of Win-Win
Yes, win-win does foster cooperation. It does foster mutual problem
solving. And it does require you to think up more deal points to (as they
say) make the pie bigger.
But let’s face facts. No matter what negotiating style you choose to
get what you want, you will run bluffs, drag red herrings across the other
party’s path, create subtle ways to extract information, and protest that
you cannot pay more even though you know full well that you are willing and able to do so.
You Win; the Other Party Feels Like a Winner In the real world
version of win-win, you avoid the hostile,“rip your face off” negotiating

Win What You Want through Negotiation

223

style so common to New York lawyers. You do not try to disrespect, belittle, denigrate, or put down the other party. You do not press the other
party against a wall, pick his pockets of everything you can ﬁnd, and
then let him loose just to watch him fall to the ﬂoor.
You choose to avoid this win-lose style of negotiating not because
you’re a nice guy or gal (although you may be) but because you can get
more of what you want by adopting a softer, more conciliating manner.
As Zig Zigler is noted for saying, “You can get anything you want in life, as long as you help the other
People want to feel
fellow get what he wants.”
like they’ve won
What is it that people want most from a negotiation? They want to feel like a winner. They want
the negotiation.
to feel like they cut the best deal they could.
Who Feels Most Like a Winner? Imagine that you’re negotiating with
a seller. You’re going back and forth on price. Finally, the seller gives in to
give you almost everything you’re asking for. You’re pleased as punch.
Then, after closing, you learn that the seller was really pressed for
cash. Had he not bluffed you into believing that he would go no lower,
he would have sold for $50,000 less than you agreed to pay.
Now, how do you feel? How would most people feel? Right. Their
sense of victory just melted away.
I have negotiated hundreds of agreements, and I can assure you that
most people value their feelings more than the objective deal points.
Naturally, exceptions occur. But more often than not, you win the most
deal points when you encourage the other party to feel like he or she is
winning the negotiations.
Experience Rules I know of no serious real estate investor who enters a negotiation to strike a “fair” agreement in any objective sense.
Rather, they enter negotiations to extract (almost) as much from the
other party as possible. These investors differ primarily in the way they
try to win these deal points.
◆ Win-lose style. The egocentric dealmaker wants to win while

forcing the other party to admit defeat. These investors want the
other party to know that they’ve been outmaneuvered, outsmarted, and overpowered.
◆ Win-win style. The investor who puts this style to work remains
content to know that he persuaded (not forced) the other party

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

224

to push the chips in his direction. But this negotiator never lets on
that he got the best of the deal. He allows the other side to win
that prize. That ploy stands as the real-world meaning of win-win.

Win-win does not
imply an
objectively fair
agreement.

Which negotiating style works best? Each
method has its advocates and practitioners. Personally, I favor win-win. Not because it’s the nice-guy,
“how to win friends and inﬂuence people” approach. Rather, my experience tells me it’s the best
approach to win what I want. Try it, and I’m sure
you will agree.
Now let’s see what methods, tactics, and gambits you can draw on to win more deal points.

Know Thyself
To get what you want from negotiations, you must ﬁrst know what you
want. As you envision it, does this potential deal ﬁt into your wealthbuilding goals? Does it ﬁt within your frame of time, money, and talents?
If completed, will this deal move you closer to where you want to go?
Many beginning investors jump to buy a property because in some
way it seems like a good deal. But before you rush into something because it seems to look good, ﬁgure out whether the deal will be good for
you. Evaluate the deal in terms of your longer-term personal and ﬁnancial goals.

Know the Property and Neighborhood
Prior to talking with the sellers, learn as much about the property as you
can. Here’s a sampling of the information you should try to discover.
◆ How is the property zoned? Are more proﬁtable uses possible?
◆ How large is the lot? What are its dimensions and boundaries?
◆ When did the property last sell? At what price?
◆ Is there a mortgage on the property? What’s the amount of the

outstanding balance? What interest rate?

Win What You Want through Negotiation

225

◆ What school districts apply to the property?
◆ What employers are located nearby?
◆ What are the neighborhood demographics? Who’s moving in?

Who’s moving out?
◆ What percent of neighborhood residents rent versus own?
◆ What range of rents and property prices apply to the neighbor-

hood?

Every time you ask
the sellers a
question, you may
tip off your
intentions.

You might wonder why you should go to all of
this trouble. Why work to discover this property and
neighborhood information on your own when you
could easily ask the sellers (or their real estate agent)?
But here’s the downside to that approach. You might
alert the sellers to some piece of information that they
could use to strengthen their own negotiating position. You might tip your hand about some hidden
value potential you see in the area or the property.

Know the Sellers
Have the sellers accepted or declined any offers on the property? If so,
what were the terms and price? (Sometimes agents will disclose this information. Sometimes you can learn it from a lender, an appraiser, the
sellers’ neighbors, or even the sellers themselves.) If a previous deal fell
through, ﬁnd out why. Will this past experience inﬂuence the sellers’ negotiating positions with you?

Do the Sellers Face Pressure?
Nearly all real estate books advise you to ﬁnd “motivated” sellers. Who
are these wonderful folks who will gladly give you a good deal? Generally, they’re sellers who face severe pressures of time, money, or family
situation (divorce, death, job move, retirement).
Know the sellers’ personal or ﬁnancial circumstances and you’ll
learn the deal points that they might value most. You’ll also discover
those issues the sellers might be willing to resolve in your favor (bargain
price, owner ﬁnancing, lease option,“subject to” purchase).

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

226

Get the Sellers to Like You
People give better deals to people they like. So try to build rapport with
the sellers. Read a copy of Dale Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People (New York: Pocket Books, 1936,
1990). Don’t insult, argue, contradict, or directly
Sellers give better
challenge anything the sellers say. Always hedge
your differing views with statements such as “Have
deals to buyers
you considered,” “It seems to me,” “In my experithey like.
ence,”“Oh, it was my understanding that,” and “What
if I were to . . .”
When sellers like you, they will help you get what you want. If they
dislike you, they will favor other buyers—even though the other buyers
are proposing what objectively appears to be a less attractive offer.
Never come at sellers from sharp angles.

Tact, Not Ultimatums
When you’re negotiating with sellers in distress, never use the cliché,
“Take it or leave it.” Apart from proving you to be a tactless amateur, such
a ploy seldom works. In most cases, even property owners under duress
would sooner lose their money than part with their ego and self-esteem.
The same negativity attaches to out-of-the-blue, lowball offers that shoot
out untethered by reason, empathy, and understanding. To work best with a troubled owner, work with,
Don’t conquer,
not against. With these types of sellers (as well as
nearly all others, too), mutual problem-solving outconciliate.
performs one-upmanship. Don’t conquer, conciliate.

Negotiate an Agreement, Not Just Price
In contrast to buying stocks where transactions take place according to
a set price and essentially ﬁxed terms, in real estate almost anything’s negotiable. If the sellers seem inﬂexible on price, look for other valueadded concessions. Or if it is they who require a quick close or sure sale,
oblige their demands in return for requests of your own.
For purposes of bragging rights, some sellers insist on a “high”
price. Okay, give them what they want.Then take back more in favorable
ﬁnancing, closing costs, possession date, warranties, inspections, repairs,

Win What You Want through Negotiation

Willingly trade
your white chips
for the seller’s
blue chips.

227

personal property, title insurance, or other terms
and conditions of value. Remember, in real estate
you can negotiate a winning agreement without directly negotiating a bargain price. As a win-win negotiator, remain alert to white-chip issues and
concerns that you can trade off to win the blue chip
issues that you prize most.

Establish Favorable Benchmarks
Sellers often entertain some strange ideas about why their property warrants a particular price. If you encounter such a situation, don’t argue.
Seek information. Ask the sellers (or their agent) how they arrived at
such a value. Frequently, you will ﬁnd their benchmark either inaccurate
or irrelevant. For example:
1. Add-in costs. “We paid $25,000 for that kitchen remodel,” the
sellers might say.
2. The Joneses’ house. “The Joneses down the street just got
$245,000 for their house, and it’s 400 square feet smaller than
ours,” is a frequently heard rationale.
3. The appraisal. “$185,000 is a great price for this property.
Look, here’s an appraisal. The appraiser says it’s worth
$205,000.”
4. Their past purchase price. “We paid $425,000 a year and a
half ago. At $445,000 you’re getting a steal. Properties in this
neighborhood are going up 10 to 15 percent a year.”
To negotiate successfully with owners who use these and other familiar types of benchmarks, subtly undermine their accuracy or relevance, but not
Avoid direct
with direct “put-you-on-the-spot” challenges.
argument, try to
Rather, tactfully phrase your investigative
questioning. Lead the sellers to doubt the
change the
applicability of their benchmark “facts.”Then
benchmarks to
supply your own more appropriate (and
those that favor
more favorable) benchmarks.
When you can get the sellers to recogyour interests.
nize and accept your benchmarks, you go a

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

228

long way toward getting them to accept your price (or other terms and
conditions). When you merely try to pull down the seller’s price while
leaving them to hold tightly to their benchmarks, you’ll usually ﬁnd it
tough to break their grip. (For various legitimate benchmarks of value,
see Chapter 12.

Tit for Tat
Never concede without asking for a return concession. “If I can meet
your need on point X, would you be willing to accept Y?” To concede
without a return request invites continued “nibbling.” In addition, agreement without request gives the seller second thoughts. “Why is Mr.
Buyer jumping at this? Am I selling too low?” Do the sellers a favor. For
each concession you give up, ask the sellers for something in return.

Get Seller Concessions Early
In their eagerness to entice your interest, many sellers will begin to concede deal points well before you formally open negotiations. During
your initial casual discussions, test the waters. “Have you thought about
carrying back ﬁnancing? I know you’re asking $415,000, but what kind
of price would you be happy with? Which of the appliances are you willing to leave? How much of the closing costs had you
planned to pay?”
Guide the sellers
By casually asking these types of questions,
into making early
you lower the ﬂoor on which later negotiations will
stand. Once negotiations begin, sellers tend to play
concessions.
their cards closer to the table.

Come Ready to Buy
Know the sellers. Know the property. Know the neighborhood. Know
the market. Know values. Know your ﬁnances. Know what you’re looking for. Then, when you see it, move, move, move. The “well-let-me-think-

Win What You Want through Negotiation

229

it-over” investor won’t score nearly as many great buys as that investor
who comes into the game ready to play. You can’t expect good buys to
remain unrecognized for long. During the past year, I’ve looked at
around a dozen properties that I considered good-to-great buys. Nearly
all of them sold within four weeks (or less) of hitting the market. Several
sold the ﬁrst day their “For Sale” signs went up.

Ask for More than You Expect
Ideally, you want the sellers to begin sweetening the deal before you
write up your ﬁrst offer. But at some point, you will need to submit a
written purchase contract. When you do, ask for much more than you
could possibly expect to eventually settle for.

Your Goal Is to Make Money
Remember, as an investor, you are doing deals primarily to make money.
Don’t become emotionally attached to an investment property as you
might a house that you intend to occupy as your long-term home. With
an investment, the numbers either work to give you a great buy, or they
don’t. When they don’t, keep on negotiating—or look elsewhere.
If you’re negotiating to buy a home that truly
suits your personal needs like no other, I would cauGo for more than
tion you to avoid a lowball offer because—unless presented tactfully—that offer could backﬁre. It could
you expect to get.
offend the sellers. In response, the sellers might either
reject you as a buyer or accept another offer. You
could end up severely disappointed. You missed the home of your dreams.
Not so with an investment property. With an investment property,
alternatives always exist. With investment properties, you’re negotiating
for ﬁnancial reward, not any one property per se.

The Beneﬁts of Asking for More than You Want or Expect
How would you feel if you offered $200,000 and the sellers quickly said,
“We’ll take it. When do you want to close?” Undoubtedly, you would

230

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

soon regret your offer. You tell yourself,“That was a dumb move. I bet
the sellers would have accepted a lot less.”
Likewise, the sellers will begin to question the wisdom of their decision. They begin to think, “If this buyer was willing to open with an
offer of $200,000, he surely would have been willing to go up to
$210,000, maybe even $225,000. We acted too hastily. We should have
countered.”
When you ask for a better deal than you could possibly expect to
get, you actually promote your goals in several ways.
◆ It gives you room to negotiate.
◆ It reduces the sellers’ expectations.
◆ It permits you to make concessions and helps the sellers feel like

they have won.
And last, but far from least,
◆ The sellers may surprise you. They might fulﬁll your wish list

with only minor changes.
In that pleasant situation, you would still want to assure the sellers
that they got nearly all that you were willing to give. Had they not accepted, you would have bought that other fourplex you were looking at.
“In fact,” you tell the sellers,“I now wish I had tried to make that other
deal. I think those sellers were willing to carry back ﬁnancing at 6 percent interest with just 10 percent down.”

Establish Credibility
No one wants to negotiate with a ﬂake. To entice the sellers, let them
know that they can count on you to do what you say. Remember, emphasize your strong points:
◆ Character
◆ Credit
◆ Capacity
◆ Consistency

Win What You Want through Negotiation

231

If your record is weak in any particular area, emphasize whatever compensating factors you can think of.
What evidence might you keep on hand to bolster your ability to
close a deal and perform as promised? To the extent these documents
would help your case, you might set up a ﬁle for seller review (when
necessary) any or all of the following items:
◆ FICO score and credit reports
◆ Past payment records on other real estate (rent or mortgage)
◆ Experience with contractors, rehabs, renovations
◆ Bank statements to prove you have more than enough cash to

close plus substantial reserves
◆ A letter of intent from your partners or a copy of your partner-

ship agreement
◆ Testimonials and references from others who have worked

with you
◆ Prior real estate ownership or management experience

Before you try to sell your offer to the property owners, sell yourself as a
credible, trustworthy investor.

Never Offer to Split the Difference
To bring a perceived deadlock to an end, you may be tempted to blurt
out,“Okay, let’s just split the difference.” Resist this impulse.
You want the sellers to propose this solution. Because once they’ve
put this offer out, they’ve essentially announced that they will accept
this new lower price.
Now you can counter the sellers’“split the difference” offer.“I don’t
know,” you say. “I really can’t go any higher than the
$290,000 ﬁgure that my calculations require. Your
new price of $310,000 won’t give me the return I
Get the sellers to
must have. But here’s what might work. If you can
ﬁrst offer to “split
carry back $50,000 at 7.0 percent instead of 7.75, I
think I can barely squeeze out my minimum return
the difference.”
at a price of $300,000.”

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

232

The Mental Commitment
Now, you’re within $10,000 and 0.75 percent of agreement. The
sellers have mentally moved their position from $330,000 to
$310,000. It’s almost certain that your deal will end up closing at a
price less than $310,000 and at an interest rate of less than 7.75 percent.
You win the deal points. The sellers—provided you have protested
long and loud enough—feel they won the negotiation. They managed to
extract from you your absolute best offer—or so they believe. Then
when you congratulate and compliment them on their tough bargaining
skills, you put the icing on their cake.

The Price Dilemma
Avoid suggesting a split-the-difference solution for one more reason. It
tends to focus the negotiations on price. When possible, rather than let
price alone create a deadlock or impasse, keep searching through your
total bundle of possible deal points. Keep looking for those high-value,
low-value tradeoffs. What might you or the sellers need or want besides
money?

List Your BATNAs

With other options
in view, you
strengthen your
walk-away
willpower.

In negotiating lingo, BATNA stands for your best alternative to a negotiated agreement. To negotiate a
winning agreement, you must maintain your walkaway willpower. When you negotiate to buy an investment property, always explicitly list your other
potential choices. Always say to yourself,“If I can’t
get the deal I’m looking for here, what other opportunities can I pursue?”
Remember, you’re not negotiating to buy a
property. You’re negotiating to earn a good proﬁt.

Win What You Want through Negotiation

233

Negotiate for Yourself
Writing in Real Estate Today, a national trade magazine for Realtors,
sales agent Sal Greer tells of an offer he received on one of his listings.
Sal says that after receiving the purchase offer from a buyer’s agent, this
agent told Sal,“This is their [ﬁrst] offer, but I know my buyers will go up
to $150,000.”
“Of course,” Sal adds, “I told my sellers that information, and we
were pleased with the outcome of the transaction.”
The lesson for you is very plain. Never let your agent do your negotiating for you. Don’t give your agent information you do not want the
other side to learn. Do not let on to your agent that you’re willing to pay
a higher price than your ﬁrst offer. Use your agent as a fact ﬁnder and intermediary. But guard your emotions, conﬁdences, and intentions.
Many ﬁrst-time investors mistakenly rely too heavily on their agents
to actually come up with the terms of their offer and carry out their negotiations. These investors will ask their agents,
“What price do you think I should offer? What’s the
Never abandon
most you think I should pay? Will the sellers pay
closing costs or carry-back ﬁnancing?” The buyers
control of
then follow whatever the agent recommends.
negotiations to
Such buyers abdicate their negotiating responyour agent (or
sibilities. If you follow their example and shift decision making to your agent, you run the following
your attorney).
risks.

You May Be Working with a Subagent
Remember, you may be working with the sellers’ listing agent or a subagent. Often “your” agent’s legal duty is to the seller. In favoring the sellers’ interests, the agent may persuade you to boost the price or terms of
your offer. Or the agent my disclose your conﬁdences to the sellers.
As a practical matter, many sellers’ agents don’t
strictly follow the letter of the law. Even though
Agents may violate
technically they’re representing the sellers, in their
the conﬁdences of
heart and efforts they may feel more loyalty to you. I
know many subagents who work hard for their inyou or the sellers.
vestors—even to the detriment of their sellers.

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

234

Nevertheless, because you don’t know for sure how an agent will
use the information you share, carefully limit your disclosures. Likewise,
when it comes to offering price and terms, rely on an agent for facts
about the sellers, selling prices of comparable properties, neighborhood
statistics, and general market conditions. Listen to the agent’s price recommendations and accept the beneﬁts of his or her knowledge and experience. But don’t delegate your decision making. You may be led into
giving up more than you need to.

Be Cautious of Buyers’ Agents
Increasingly, brokerage ﬁrms and sales agents have been promoting buyers’ agency. Because sellers are represented by their listing agents, buyers presumably need someone to look out for their interests. Marilyn
Wilson, a Bellingham,Washington, real estate broker, says,“Buyers should
think of their agents as attorneys. Would you want to have one attorney
representing both parties in a divorce settlement?”
Superﬁcially, the idea sounds reasonable. But
even if you choose to employ a buyers’ agent, you
Buyer’s agents,
still need to guard your disclosures and negotiating
too, face conﬂicts
strategy. First of all, like the buyers’ agent Sal Greer
referred to earlier, even your agent may disclose conof interest.
ﬁdences—either intentionally or unintentionally.
Second, we’re all subject to subtle inﬂuences. A
buyers’ agent may talk you into offering a higher price or better terms
because it will make his or her job easier. Under which scenario do you
think your agent will work the hardest for you: When the agent knows
you offered $385,000 but you’ve said you’re willing to go up to
$410,000, or when you offer $385,000 and say,“If they don’t accept this
offer, there’s four or ﬁve other properties I’d like to look at”?

Watch What You Say
Regardless of whether you’re working with a sellers’ agent, a buyers’
agent, a dual agent, or a facilitator, watch what you say. Don’t tell an
agent everything and then turn the negotiations over to her with the
simple instructions, “Do the best job you can,” or “Why don’t you try
$235,000 and if that doesn’t ﬂy, we can go up to $245,000.”

Win What You Want through Negotiation

235

In fact, it doesn’t matter whether we’re talking about lawyers, insurance agents, mortgage brokers, ﬁnancial planners, real estate agents, or any other type of
All types of agents
professional relationship, conﬂict of interest always
lurks in the background. You must walk a ﬁne line.
compromise their
Release enough information to achieve the results
principals (and
you want, but not so much that you invite an agent
principles).
to sacriﬁce your interests to the interests of someone else (including herself).

Leave Something on the Table
Negotiating expert Bob Woolf says,“There isn’t any contract I have negotiated where I didn’t feel I could have gone for more money or an additional beneﬁt.” Why leave money on the table? Because skilled
negotiators know,“The deal’s not over til it’s over.” If you push too hard,
you create resentment and hostility in the other party. Even if they’ve
signed a contract, they’ll start thinking of all the ways they can get out of
it. Even worse, if you stumble on the way to closing, they won’t help you
up. They’ll just kick dirt in your face.
Especially in the purchase of real estate—
where emotions run strong—you’re better off leavPush the sellers’
ing something on the table. The purchase
limits and later
agreement only forms stage one of your negotiations. Later, you might encounter problems with rethey may shove
spect to property inspections, appraisal, ﬁnancing,
you back.
possession date, closing date, surveys, zoning, building permits, or any number of other things. Without
goodwill, trust, and cooperation, unpleasant setbacks on the way to closing can throw your agreement into contentious dispute.
As a win-win negotiator, make the other parties feel they’ve won.
Even though you’re persistently pulling more chips into your own pile,
assure the sellers that they’ve never given up more than they had to.
When you leave something on the table, the sellers will feel more committed to the agreement.

C H A P T E R

16

How to Write Your
Purchase Offer

Quite likely, when you get ready to make your offer to buy a property,
you’ll be handed a so-called standard purchase agreement to ﬁll out and
sign. But wait. Before you blindly accept that form, read it closely.

No Single Contract Form
No all-purpose form contract has ever been written. Just as important,
the form used in your area may not fully serve you or the sellers’ interests. Although space here doesn’t permit a detailed discussion of every
contract term that you might see, I’ll go over many of those terms that
you should pay special attention to.
Indeed, before you even think about putting in an offer on a property, ask a real estate agent to provide you with a
blank copy of the form contract(s) that the agent
Review a blank
typically relies on to complete a purchase agreecontract form long
ment. Then read each clause. Compare it to the discussions in this chapter. Ask the agent (or legal
before you need it.
counsel) to clarify any terms or clauses that you
don’t fully understand.
236

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

237

Make Sure You Draft These Clauses with Care and Understanding
Although there’s no such thing as a “standard” purchase offer, the discussion here does explain those clauses that you should make sure you
(your agent, your lawyer) draft with care and understanding.

Names of the Parties
Your agreement should include the names of all parties to the transaction. It is especially important that your agreement name all owners
(sellers) and make sure all are available to sign your offer as soon as you
reach agreement. Be wary of negotiating with a seller whose spouse or
partners do not actively join in the negotiations. If they don’t later agree
to sign, you have no deal.
Some sellers will claim that their co-owners will go along with
whatever they say. Yet, after you commit, the seller will come back and
say,“Gee, I’m terribly sorry. My partner refuses to sign. He thinks I’m giving the property away. He wants another $25,000,
but I’ve told him I can’t renege and change the
Don’t fall for the
terms. But he insists. So I’ll tell you what, if you can
agree to another $10,000, I’ll go back to my partner
“good guy–bad
and do my best to convince him to go along. I’m reguy” gambit.
ally sorry, but sometimes my partner gets obstinate
and there’s little I can do to reason with him.”
This ploy is one of the oldest tricks in the book. But it often works.
So sellers (and buyers) continue to use it. Just don’t be surprised when
you have it pulled on you—if you’ve proceeded to negotiate with someone who lacks the legal authority to carry out the agreement. (Or some
sellers might say,“Gee, I’m sorry. I know I agreed to these terms, but my
lawyer says ‘no way.’”)

Site Description
Identify the property that you’re buying by street address and legal description. As a safeguard, walk the boundaries of the property as you
follow the lines on a survey or a plot plan. When you walk the boundaries, note any encroachments. Does the neighbors’ garage overlap the

238

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

property line? Is there a crooked driveway, a misplaced fence, or overhanging tree limbs that could
create a problem?
the boundaries of
Make sure the lot size you think you’re buying
the site.
actually measures up to the size you’re getting. Especially where a property site borders a vacant lot,
ﬁeld, or creek, don’t merely assume the lot lines run where they seem to
run. Sometimes, too, what appears to be the subject property’s yard actually belongs to the neighboring property. Visually verify where the surveyed boundaries really lie.

Walk and conﬁrm

Building Description
Often, your real estate agreement needs to identify only the lot, not the
building. That’s because the legal deﬁnition of real estate (the surface of
the Earth) automatically includes all structures permanently attached to
the land.
If the seller, though, has represented to you that the buildings are of
a speciﬁc size or are built of certain materials, or of a certain historic
date or design, then write those features (whatever they are) into the
property description. In Berkeley, California, buyers sued the sellers of a
gracious old home because the sellers had (mistakenly) told the buyers
that the home had been designed by Julia Morgan, a famous San Francisco Bay Area architect of the early 1900s.
The buyers claimed that they had not just
agreed to buy a house on a speciﬁc site. Rather, they
If you think you’re
had offered to buy a Julia Morgan house. Lacking
the Julia Morgan prestige, the buyers believed they
buying a Julia
were entitled to damages. (The court agreed and
Morgan design,
awarded damages to the buyers.)
write it into your
If you think you’re buying a prewar brownstone, or maybe the house where Elvis Presley was
purchase offer.
raised, write it into your agreement. Let the sellers
know exactly what you expect to receive in all its
critical details. Verify that the building you think you’re buying actually
ﬁts the description of the property that you’re relying on. Should your
expectations (the seller’s representations) prove incorrect, you may be
able to rescind the agreement, sue for damages, or both.

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

239

Personal Property
Although the legal deﬁnition of real estate applies to land and buildings, it
does not necessarily include the personal property that the sellers have
promised to leave for you. (Generally, the term personal property refers
to items that are not “permanently”attached to a building or the land.) Say
the sellers of a fourplex provide their tenants window air conditioners,
miniblinds, gas ranges, refrigerators, and ceiling fans. In your written offer
to buy that property, expressly list these additional items.
Courts Have Extended the Deﬁnition of Real Property While it’s
true that some courts have extended the concept of real estate to include personal property that is “adapted for use”with a speciﬁc building,
don’t depend on litigation to force the sellers to convey the personal
property that you believed to be included in the sale. Leave no doubt—
write it out. Go through every room of the property. List every item that
the sellers might plausibly maintain was not a part of your agreement because it was their “personal property” and therefore not included with
the sale of the real estate.
Who Owns What? Sellers or Tenants? Listing personal property
serves another purpose as well. It requires the sellers to clearly point out
what personal property belongs to them and what belongs to their tenants. Property investors who do not obtain an accurate list of the seller’s
personal property may later ﬁnd themselves in dispute with tenants
when the tenants claim,“That refrigerator is ours. That junk icebox the
landlord provided was carted off to the dump two years ago. We bought
this refrigerator from Betty’s parents.”
To be safe, ask the sellers’ tenants to okay any list
of personal property that you and the sellers prepare.
Ask the tenants to
After you have closed on the deal is not the time to
verify the list of
learn that the furniture and appliances that you
thought you bought actually belong to the tenants.
owners’ items.

Price and Financing
When you prepare your offer, spell out the precise purchase price and
the terms of the ﬁnancing. List the amounts payable, how payable, when

240

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

payable, and the interest rate(s). Make interpretation easy for a disinterested third party. Leave nothing to decide at some later date. “Seller
agrees to carry back $20,000 on mutually agreeable terms” leaves too
much ambiguity.
When planning to borrow new ﬁnancing, or even if you’re assuming the seller’s mortgage, this same advice holds: Don’t leave the amount
and terms of ﬁnancing open to question. If you need a 5 percent down
loan at 6.0 percent interest, write those terms into your ﬁnancing contingency.

Earnest Money Deposit
Contrary to popular belief, the validity of your purchase offer does not
depend on the amount of your earnest money deposit, or for that matter, whether you’ve even paid a
Earnest money
deposit. Earnest money is nothing more than a goodsignals your intent
faith showing that you intend to complete your purchase. More than anything else, choose your deposit
and credibility.
amount as part of your negotiation strategy.
Size of the Deposit Large deposits signal to the sellers that you are a
serious buyer. Some investors use large deposits to offset their lowball
offers. A large earnest money deposit tells the sellers,“You can count on
me to buy your property. This large deposit proves that I mean what I
say. Wouldn’t you rather go for a sure thing now rather than wait for a
better offer that may never come along?”
On the other hand, a small deposit may signal that you’re ﬁnancially
weak, or that you’re trying to tie up the property cheaply while you mull
over other options. But here’s the rub: Smart sellers won’t accept purchase offers that don’t truly commit you to buying their property.
Learn Local Custom To some degree, whether the sellers think your
deposit large or small, serious or triﬂing, depends on local custom. So
gauge the impression you will make with your deposit by the amounts
local sellers and realty agents think reasonable for the type of property
that you’re buying.
Just keep in mind that a deposit that seems low tarnishes your credibility. A high deposit brightens your credibility. You could employ a low

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

241

deposit strategy and rely on other factors to support your credibility as a
buyer (current ownership of multiple properties, strong FICO score,
high net worth, person of integrity). But this trick is difﬁcult to pull off.
As a rule, few things speak louder than ready cash.

Quality of Title

Always rely on
legal counsel or
title insurance for
opinions of title
quality.

Many arcane legalities surround the issue of title
quality. To get good title, you need a real estate attorney or, better, a title insurer. However, your purchase
agreement will state the title guarantees and exceptions that govern your transaction. Make sure you
know what these are before you sign. Especially exercise caution when you buy a property through
foreclosure, tax sale, sheriff’s auction, probate, or
some other type of sale where the previous owner
of the property does not sign the deed.

Property Condition
Your purchase offer should address the issue of property condition in
two ways. First, ask the sellers to complete a property disclosure statement that lists every conceivable problem or defect that now or ever has
affected the property and the neighborhood.
Second, while you can learn a great deal from seller disclosure, you
can’t learn everything. Generally, sellers must disclose only what they
know. As added protection, include a property inspection contingency
in your offer. Then, check out the property with one or more pros who
can verify the condition of the plumbing, heating and air conditioning,
electrical system, rooﬁng, and foundation.
You can write your inspection contingency to set a cost limit on
needed repairs (e.g., $1,000). Ideally, the sellers should pay these costs.
But if you’ve negotiated a bargain price, you might accept responsibility.
If repair costs go over your stated amount, your contingency clause
should give you the right to withdraw your offer and get back your
earnest money deposit.

242

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

Preclosing Property Damage (Casualty Clause)
Your purchase offer should require the sellers to deliver their property
to you on the date of closing (or the date of possession) in the same
condition as it stood on the date the sellers accepted your offer. If the
property suffers damage (ﬁre, earthquake, vandalism, hurricane, ﬂood)
after the purchase contract has been signed, but prior to closing, the sellers must repair the property at their expense. Alternatively, in the event
of damage, you or the sellers may be allowed to pull out of the agreement, and you will get back your deposit.

Closing (Settlement) Costs
Many real estate transactions involve thousands of dollars in closing
costs. You or the sellers might pay for title insurance, an appraisal, mortgage points, buy-down fees, application fees, lender-mandated repairs,
lawyers’ fees, mortgage assumption fees, recording
fees, transfer taxes, document stamps, survey, property inspections, escrow fees, real estate brokerage
Some cash-short
fees, and other expenses. These costs can quickly
investors trade off
add up to a fair-sized chunk of money. Who pays
a higher price for
each of these costs—you or the sellers? Local cusseller-paid closing
tom frequently dictates, but negotiation can override custom. If the sellers won’t drop their price as
costs.
low as you’d like, ask them to pay more of the settlement costs.

Closing and Possession Dates
Your offer to buy a property should set dates for settlement and possession. When you or the sellers place great importance on either a quick
(or delayed) closing date, that date can play a valuable role in your negotiations. Because of a need for ready cash, the sellers might trade a lower
price for an early closing date. Or for tax reasons, the sellers may prefer
to delay settlement until after they’ve begun a new tax year.
Likewise for the date of possession. The sellers might want a fast
closing, but they also may want to keep possession of the property (especially if it’s their home) for some period that extends beyond the set-

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

243

tlement date. Maybe their new home isn’t yet completed. Maybe they
would like to postpone moving until after their children ﬁnish the
school term. Their reasons vary, but as a smart negotiator, feel out the
sellers on their preferred closing and possession dates. Then use this information to shape your offer. If you’re willing to meet the sellers’ needs
on this issue, they may meet your requests on price or terms.

Leases
When you buy a rental property, you must abide by the valid leases and
promises that the sellers have entered into with the tenants. Especially
investigate these issues:
◆ Rent levels. How much do the tenants pay in rents? Are any ten-

ants in arrears? Have any tenants prepaid? How long have the
current rent levels been in effect?
◆ Concessions. Did the tenants receive any concession for signing their leases such as one month’s free rent, a new 18-speed bicycle, or any other incentives that lower the effective amount of
rents the tenants are paying?
◆ Utilities. Do the leases require the tenants to pay all of their
own utilities? If not, for what utilities do the owners pay?
◆ Yard care, snow removal, other services. Who provides
yard care, snow removal, or other necessary services such as
small repairs within the rental units? Who pays for garbage and
trash pickup? Do the leases obligate the sellers to provide laundry facilities, off-street parking, a club house, exercise room,
child-care center, or commuter transportation?
◆ Furniture and appliances. Check the leases to determine
whether the owners are required to provide tenants with furniture or appliances. If so, which ones, what quality, and who is responsible for maintenance, repairs, and replacement?
◆ Duration. What term is remaining on each of the leases? Do the
tenants enjoy the option to renew? If renewed, does the lease (or
rent control laws) limit the amount of rent increase that you can
impose?
◆ Security deposits. How much money has the owner collected
from the tenants in security deposits? Have any tenants prepaid
their last month’s rent? Does the seller have an inspection sheet

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

244

that shows the condition of each of the units at the time the tenants moved in? Have the tenants signed those inspection sheets?
◆ Tenant conﬁrmation. Whenever feasible, ask the tenants to
conﬁrm the terms of the lease as the sellers have represented
them. Make sure the sellers (or their property manager) have not
entered into any side agreements with tenants that would modify or override the terms of the lease. Learn whether the sellers
have orally promised any of the tenants special services, rent relief, or other dispensations.
Never forget: Even though you will own the property, the tenants
were there ﬁrst. For the remaining term of their leases, their leasehold
rights may trump your rights of ownership.

Contingency Clauses
Typically, you will hedge your purchase offers with a ﬁnancing contingency and a property inspection contingency. If you can’t get ﬁnancing
on the terms you want, or if the condition of the property doesn’t meet
your standards (as written into your purchase offer), you can call the
deal off. The sellers must return your earnest money to you.
Nevertheless, even though you can condition
your offer on anything you want, that doesn’t mean
“No strings
the sellers will accept it. They may tell you,“No way
are we going to take our property off the market for
attached” offers
several months while you try to put together a syncan persuade
dication deal. Come back and talk to us after you’ve
sellers to accept a
raised the money.” The more you hedge your offer
with deal-threatening contingencies, the less likely
lower price.
the sellers will sign it.
On the other hand, a clean “no strings attached”
offer may gain the sellers’ approval even when your price or terms don’t
meet their hopes and expectations. Sellers prefer ﬁrm offers.

Assignment and Inspection
In many states, buyers may freely assign their real estate purchase contracts. However, assume nothing. Talk this issue over with a lawyer. As a

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

245

buyer who (at least on some occasions) may want to “ﬂip” a contract,
make sure that the sellers cannot legally object. As a safeguard, you can
insert an assignment clause into your offer similar to the following:
Buyers may assign this Contract and all rights and obligations
hereunder to any other person, corporation, or trustee.
The sellers may oppose such broad language and try to negotiate language such as:
Buyer may assign this Contract only with the written approval
of the sellers. Consent by the sellers shall not be arbitrarily
withheld.
The sellers may want the right to approve your assignees just to satisfy themselves that the assignees possess the money and credit to complete the purchase. The sellers also may want you to remain liable for
damages (or speciﬁc performance) should your assignees default. Obviously, you would like to avoid (or limit) this liability. If you assign the purchase agreement, you want out of the deal permanently.
When you do obtain the right of assignment, insert a clause that
gives you access. Your potential assignees must be able to inspect and
evaluate the property. Otherwise, only speculators would show any interest in buying the contract from you.

Recording in the Public Records
If you are writing up a lease option, lease purchase, contract-for-deed, or
some other type of purchase offer that delays closing of title for, say,
more than six months, make sure you can record the signed contract in
the public records. This recording serves notice to the world that you
hold rights in that property.
Without this notice, the sellers may place mortgages or other liens
against the property that could jeopardize your legal interests. Also,
without a public record, the sellers’ judgment creditors, or perhaps the
Internal Revenue Service, might stake a priority claim to the property.
You need to discuss these issues with competent legal counsel. You
do not want to make payments to the sellers only to ﬁnd years later that
the sellers cannot deliver good title to you.

246

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

Systems and Appliances
Regardless of whether your closing will take place within 30 days or 3
years, your purchase offer should clearly spell out who is responsible in
the interim for maintenance, repair, and replacement of any malfunctioning systems (heating, air conditioning, electrical, waste disposal, well
water) or appliances. To the extent possible, spell
out how to resolve the “repair or replace” dilemma.
Sellers should
For example, if the air conditioning goes out,
the sellers may want to repair it at a cost of $450 in
guarantee the
lieu of a total system replacement that would cost
condition of all
$3,200. Yet, if the repairs will only keep it clanking
appliances and
and clunking for, at best, 6 to 12 months, you would
HVAC systems.
want to insist on replacement.

Environmental Hazards
Today, with both heightened costs for environmental cleanups and extensive regulatory controls, your contract needs to
address any environmental hazards that may affect
the property. Lead paint, asbestos, mold, urethane
When possible,
formaldehyde, underground heating oil tanks,
make the seller
radon, and who knows what other dangers the Enviresponsible for
ronmental Protection Agency may discover, can cost
property owners thousands in remedial or replaceenvironmental
ment expenses.
risks.
Ideally, you might like your purchase offer to
read as follows:
Sellers warrant that the property complies with all current
federal, state, or local environmental laws, rules, or regulations.
Sellers agree to indemnify buyers for all required cleanup
costs that shall be necessary to remedy environmental hazards
(known or unknown) that existed during the sellers’ period of
ownership.
This language only suggests, but it covers two main points: (1) Is
the property free of hazards? and (2) If hazards are discovered, who is
going to pay for the cleanup? Under federal (and many state) laws, as

How to Write Your Purchase Offer

247

owner of a property, you may have to pay for its environmental
cleanup—even when you are innocent of creating the hazard.

Summing Up
Your offer will include many important terms that control the relationship between you and the sellers. Read these terms and conditions before you sign your offer. Then with counsel, add, rewrite, amend, or strike
out terms and conditions as you see ﬁt.
Once you and the sellers sign, you’re both bound to the extent of
the law. To protect yourself, draft your offer so that you understand your
agreement—including what recourses, legal remedies, and costs apply if
you or the other party pulls out of the deal without a legitimate reason.

C H A P T E R

17

Craft Your Lease to
Increase Proﬁts

Most small property owners try to use their leases to strictly control tenant behavior. Although imperfect, a written lease does legally protect
your interests—more so than an oral agreement. But your lease can
serve another important purpose: It can help you achieve a competitive
advantage over other property owners.

Achieve Competitive Advantage
Before you decide on the speciﬁc clauses within your lease, closely review the leases of other property owners. Look for ways to differentiate
your rental agreement that would encourage tenants (your target market) to choose your property over competing properties. For example,
to gain competitive advantage, you might
◆ Lower your upfront cash requirements.
◆ Offer a repair guarantee.
◆ Shorten your lease term.
◆ Guarantee a lease renewal without an increase in rent.
◆ Place tenant security and rent deposits in an investment of the

tenant’s choice. Accumulate interest for the tenant’s beneﬁt.
248

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

249

Or you might develop a “tight” lease and position your property as
rentals that cater to more discriminating and responsible tenants. You
could include severe lease restrictions on noise and other nuisances
common to other rentals. Then, promote your property as “the quiet
place to live.”When you adapt leases to ﬁt your target market, you can increase your rental revenues, achieve a higher rate of occupancy, and
lower your operating expenses.

Craft Your Rental Agreement
As you think about your lease, look for ways to creatively adapt (or omit)
speciﬁc clauses to better appeal to your tenants. Properly crafted,your lease
will not only protect you legally, but also help you attract topﬂight tenants.

Names and Signatures
Most property owners require a lease to name all residents who are permitted to live in the unit—including children, if any. All adult residents
should sign the lease. As a general rule, investors do not permit tenants
to freely bring in additional tenants or to substitute new co-tenants for
those moving out. Normally, all new tenants are required to fully satisfy
the application and qualiﬁcation process.

Joint and Several Liability
When you rent to co-tenants (even if husband and wife—divorces do
happen), include a “joint and several liability” clause. This clause makes
all tenants individually and collectively responsible for all owed rents
and tenant damages.
Without this clause, individual co-tenants often
claim that they’re liable only for “their part of the
rent.” Or, maybe you’ll hear,“I didn’t burn that hole
Make each tenant
in the carpet. Jones did. Collect from him.” Most of
responsible for all
the time, Jones has already moved out and disaprents and
peared. Joint and several liability gives you the legal
right to collect payment from the other co-tenants
damages.
who have the money.

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

250

Guests
To get around signing up their roommates, some tenants won’t ofﬁcially
bring in new or additional co-tenants. When you show up and wonder who
these new people are, you’ll be told,“They’re guests.”“Joe’s just staying here
for a couple of weeks until he’s called back to work at
Ford.” Two months later, Joe’s still there and now his
Be wary of
girlfriend, Jill, has also taken up “guest” status.
“guests” who
Whether you might get these kinds of tenants
depends
on the type of people your property atbecome
tracts as well as your tenant-screening standards. As a
undocumented
precaution, place a “guest clause” in your lease that
tenants.
limits the number and length of time guests can stay.

Term of Lease
Many landlords reﬂexively set the term of their leases at one year. In
some markets, though, this tendency creates too few properties available
for shorter (or longer) terms. Because short-term (especially seasonal)
tenancies bring in higher rents, you might boost your income by appealing to this potentially underserved market. Another possibility: To reduce turnover and vacancy, give tenants a slight discount if they sign up
for a lease term of, say, two or three years.

Property Description
Precisely describe the property rights you’re giving your tenants. For example, do they receive the right to use the garage, parking spaces, attic,
basement, or outdoor storage shed? Or should you rent those areas at an
additional price? Can you convert any of these spaces to a higher, better,
and more proﬁtable use?

Inventory and Describe Personal Property
If you provide personal property for your tenants (washer, dryer, refrigerator, stove, microwave, blinds, drapes, curtains, furniture), inventory and describe (with photographs or serial numbers where possible) each separate

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

251

item and include the list as a lease addendum. Unbelievable as it may sound,
I know of vacating tenants who have taken their landlord’s almost-new appliances and left in their place appliances that ranked just above junk.

Rental Amounts
Some owners set their rent levels low to reduce turnover, vacancy
losses, and tenant complaints. (Complaints fall because tenants don’t
want to give you reason to raise their bargain rent.) Also, slightly belowmarket rents will give you a large pool of applicants from which you can
select topﬂight tenants. Nevertheless, lower rents may not be necessary.
With scarce and desirable features, your units will attract quality tenants
even with rents that sit at the top of the market.

Late Fees and Discounts
To encourage tenants to pay their rent early, some owners offer an “early
payment discount.” Others levy late fees if the tenant’s check comes in,
say, three to ﬁve days past its due date. In recent years, more owners
have adopted the “carrot” approach over the “stick” approach. These
owners claim that discounts create better tenant relations, work more effectively, and are easier to enforce.
Regardless of which method you choose,
Rent only to
never, never, never allow tenants to get behind in
people who pay
their rent. Begin an eviction as soon as your lease
and local ordinances permit. Tenants who can’t pay
on time, every
today will rarely pay tomorrow.
time.

Multiple Late Payments
What about the tenant who regularly pays on the eighth or ninth every
month—even though the rent falls due on the ﬁrst? As long as the late
fee is included, some owners tolerate this behavior. I would not. I want
my rents paid on time, every time.
To enforce the “on time, every time” requirement, I either work out
a new payment date with the tenants that better matches their cash
ﬂows or I enforce the “multiple late payment” clause. This clause sets

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

252

forth a “three strikes and you’re out rule.” When tenants won’t pay on
time, kick them out and keep their security deposit (if local law permits). Ditto for repeated bad checks.

Tenant “Improvements”
“If we buy the paint, is it OK for us to paint the living room?” As an
owner of rental properties, you will receive requests like this from tenants. Or you may end up with tenants who don’t ask. They redecorate
ﬁrst and wait for you to ask questions later—like,“How could you paint
the living room deep purple?” or “What happened to the oak tree that
was in the back yard?”To stop tenants from diminishing the value of your property with their weird
No tenant
“improvements,” require them to obtain your writimprovements
ten permission before they paint, wallpaper, redecorate, renovate, repanel, remove, or in any other way
without
modify your property.
permission.

Owner Access
Under the laws of most states, you may not enter your tenants’ home (except for emergencies) without their permission. If you do want access
to make inspections and repairs, take care of damages (like an overﬂowing toilet), show the unit to prospective tenants (or buyers), or for any
other reason, include a reasonable and nonintrusive “owner access”
clause in your leases.

Quiet Enjoyment
Do you want to guarantee your tenants that they will not suffer from noise
and disturbances created by other tenants? Then tightly restrict their
neighbor-disturbing partying, ﬁghting, arguing, and loud lovemaking.
Allow them to play their television, radio, and stereo only at low volumes. You could place a general clause in your lease such as:
Residents agree not to create, generate, broadcast, or otherwise cause sounds or disturbances to emanate from them-

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

253

selves, their guests, or their residences into the residences
of others. All residents agree to supremely respect and promote the quiet enjoyment of the building by all other residents.
Beware of buying buildings with those notorious “paper-thin”walls.
Unless you can solve this problem (without spending much money)
your tenants will constantly complain to you.

Noxious Odors
As with noise and disturbances, noxious odors wafting throughout a
building can stir up tenant dissatisfaction and complaints. Leading
sources of noxious odors include smoking, cooking
(especially some types of ethnic foods), and heavy
Noise and noxious
users of perfumes. If any of these (or other types of
noxious odors) seem like they could present a probodors drive away
lem, then your lease should include a clause that limgood tenants.
its or excludes the causes of these odors.

Tenant Insurance
Your property owners’ insurance policy will not cover the personal
property of your tenants, so you may want to require them to buy a tenants’ insurance policy. Many
investors have learned through experience that
Ask your tenants
when uninsured tenants suffer damage to their
to buy insurance
property (through ﬁre or other peril), they sue the
to cover their own
owner for negligence. Even if the building burns
after being hit by lightning, the tenants (or their
possessions.
lawyers) will claim that you should have installed a
better lightning rod.

Sublet and Assignment
When tenants plan to be away from their home for an extended period
(summer in Europe), they may want to sublet their unit. When tenants

254

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

plan to relocate permanently (job change, bought a house), they may
want to assign their lease to someone else. To address this issue, you can
adopt one of these positions:
1. No right to sublet or assign.
2. Right to sublet or assign with owner’s written permission.
Original tenants and new tenants both assume liability for rent
payments and damages.
3. Right to sublet or assign with owner’s written permission.
Original tenants released from any liability for future rent payments or damages. Owner must look exclusively to new tenants for ﬁnancial performance.
4. Unlimited right to sublet or assign. Original tenants remain
liable.
Without a lease restriction, some courts rule that tenants may freely
assign or sublet their units. You don’t want that outcome. So to protect
yourself, include a sublet and assignment clause in your lease.

Pets
Too many property owners prohibit pets. In my experience, responsible
tenants care for their pets in a responsible manner. Irresponsible people
treat their pets irresponsibly. If you select responsible people, you usually can eliminate your “pet problems” without excluding all pets. By accepting responsible people with well-behaved pets, you can boost
proﬁts. Often, you can charge a “pet premium” that requires higher rents
and a higher security deposit.
If you do accept pets, draft a pet rules addendum and attach it to
your lease. Please consider the needs of the pet. I have seen pet rules
that require large dogs to be kept permanently tethered in the back yard on an eight-foot chain. Other
Develop your rules
inhumane rules require that a dog must be permanently kept in a basement or on a back porch. If you
about pets to meet
feel so little for the lives of animals, totally exclude
the needs of
them from your rental properties. Moreover, any pet
tenants and the
owner who accepts such cruel restrictions does not
qualify (in my opinion) as a responsible person or a
pets.
responsible pet owner.

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

255

Security Deposits
Collect a security deposit from all of your tenants and cover these issues
in your lease:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Amount of the deposit
When payable
Rate of interest, if any
Under what conditions tenants will forfeit all or part of their
deposit
5. When the deposit will be refunded if tenants satisfy all terms
of the lease
Amount and When Payable In terms of amount, I favor high security deposits plus ﬁrst and last month’s rent—always payable in advance. (This lesson I learned the hard way.) You undoubtedly will get
prospects who want to pay their deposit piecemeal over one to three
months. Yield to this request and you invite trouble. (Ditto for postdated
checks.)
Interest Some local and state laws require owners to pay at least some
minimum rate of interest to their tenants. If this law applies in your area,
make sure your tenants know they’ll be receiving interest. In fact, I recommend paying interest to tenants even if the law doesn’t require it.
Today, many tenants get upset if you insist on a deposit (especially a large
one), yet refuse to pass along its earnings to them.
Forfeiture At the time tenants ﬁrst sign their lease, make sure they
understand that their security deposit does not limit their liability for
rent or damages. In addition, clearly explain to the tenants the level of
care (cleanliness, damages) they must meet to get their full security deposit returned to them. Also, explain how you will calculate any
amounts that you might have to subtract from their deposits (or under
what conditions you will try to collect additional money from them.) Security deposits have become a large source of dispute between owners
and tenants.Take special care to explain your deposit policies (and make
sure you always comply with the law).
Deposit Return As a courtesy to your tenants, return their deposits
with interest as soon as you know the correct amount. If possible, the

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

256

Return deposits
promptly.

best time is at the end of the ﬁnal walkthrough. You
pay. The tenants accept. You shake hands with them
and wish them well in their new home.

Yard Care
When you rent out a house or duplex, you probably will want the tenants to care for the yard. But don’t just say,“tenants are responsible for
yard care.” I once made this mistake with otherwise excellent tenants.
To these tenants, “yard care” meant cutting the grass. To me it meant
watering the lawn when needed, tending the ﬂowers and shrubs, and
trimming the hedges to maintain them at their existing height of four
feet.
Because the house was located in Florida and I was living in the San
Francisco Bay Area, my visits to the property were not frequent. When
after two years I did return, the hedges had grown wildly to a height of
seven or eight feet, many ﬂowers and shrubs were dead, and the lawn
had scattered brown spots.
Learn from my mistake. If you want your tenants to care for the
yard, spell out exactly what care and condition you want them to
maintain.

Parking, Number, and Type of Vehicles
Some tenants believe that if they can’t ﬁnd parking in a driveway or on
the street, it’s OK to park in the front yard. Or they may persist in blocking their neighbors’ driveways. Or they leave unsightly junk (inoperable) cars to accumulate around
Don’t let tenant
the property. RVs, boats, and trailers also can create
aesthetic and parking problems.
cars create
To head off this kind of trouble, place a “parkparking problems.
ing clause” in your leases. List the number and
types of permitted vehicles. Then designate the
only places where they may be parked properly. You also may want to
restrict the backyard (or frontyard) mechanic who disassembles his
car and leaves the parts scattered about for days, weeks, or even
months.

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

257

Repairs
Increasingly, owners of rental properties are shifting at least some costs
of repair onto their tenants. Stopped-up toilets and broken garbage disposals seldom occur without tenant abuse. As a minimum, you may want
to charge your tenants, say, a $50 repair fee for each time a repair becomes necessary. Some owners even make tenants fully responsible for
certain types of repairs—unless the service provider establishes that the
tenants were not to blame. Overall, your repair policy should encourage
your tenants to care for the property as well as reduce your out-ofpocket costs for unscheduled maintenance and replacement.
Appliances Some owners tell their tenants that they may use the appliances currently in the property, but that the owner will not pay for repairs or replacement if the appliances fail to work right. If the tenants
don’t agree to accept the appliances on those terms, the owner then removes them and the tenants provide and maintain their own appliances.
Which Approach Is Best? As with all lease clauses, no one approach
to repairs works best in all situations. It depends on the types of tenants
and properties you’re dealing with. Undoubtedly,
some people will show little care for your property.
At best, your
Yet at the same time, they expect you to jump into
repair policy
action whenever their abuse or neglect creates a
problem. These are the people at whom you want to
encourages care
aim your tenant repair clauses. (Of course, ideally
and reduces costs.
you want to avoid these kinds of tenants.)

Neat and Clean

Roaches do not
like to live in clean
apartments and
houses.

Regardless of whether you are renting out houses or
apartments, your lease should set standards of neatness and cleanliness. Proper disposal of trash and
garbage are bare minimums. When tenant neglect
invites roaches, ants, or ﬂeas into the property, the
tenant should pay the exterminator—not you.
Other do’s and don’ts may address unwashed
dishes; disposal of used motor oil, broken furniture,

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

258

or appliances; bicycle storage; materials awaiting pickup for recycling;
and vehicles that drip motor oil or transmission ﬂuid.

Rules and Regulations
Especially for apartment buildings—or for rental units in co-ops or condominium projects—prepare a list of rules and regulations that tenants
are expected to follow. Make sure your lease incorporates all of these
rules (usually by addendum). Also, note within your lease that you (or
the homeowners’ association) reserve the right to reasonably amend or
modify the listed rules.

Wear and Tear
So-called standard leases often state that your tenants are responsible for
all damages except normal wear and tear. I would never use such a
clause. It invites tenant neglect and abuse. Many tenants believe that
soiled carpets, cracked plaster, broken screens, and
numerous other damages reﬂect nothing more than
Avoid a “wear and
“normal wear and tear.”
I disagree. If a tenant properly cares for a proptear” clause.
erty, it will not suffer any noticeable wear and tear
during a tenancy of one year or less. For such shortterm periods of residence, tenants should leave the property in the same
condition in which they accepted it. Eliminating the “wear and tear”
clause will save you money and argument.

Lawful Use of Premises
As a matter of good business practice, and as a good-neighbor policy,
your lease should require tenants to abide by all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. This clause may help you to remedy undesirable
behavior that you didn’t think to put in your lease. Especially enforce a
zero-tolerance rule against illegal drugs or other offenses that can result
in asset forfeiture.

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

259

Notice
To help reduce rent loss during turnover, require tenants to give you advance notice of the exact date they plan to move. Then you can begin to
publicize the unit’s upcoming availability. Ideally, you’ll ﬁnd a new tenant who will move in within a day or two after the previous tenants have
moved out.
Most owners require 30 days’ written notice. But if you’re operating in a weak or seasonal rental market, you might ask for 45 or 60 days’
notice. Or if you expect immediate demand for your rental property, you
could reduce your advance notice to, say, 15 days. In other words, tie
your written notice requirement to the length of time you believe necessary to locate a new, strongly qualiﬁed tenant.

Nonwaivers
For reasons of courtesy or practicality, you may, on occasion, permit tenants to temporarily breach a lease clause or house
rule. To prevent tenants from stretching this courDon’t let
tesy beyond your intent, your lease can include a
exceptions
“nonwaiver clause.” In this clause, you make clear
that your kindness today in no way waives your
become the rule.
right to enforce the letter of the lease tomorrow.

Breach of Lease (or House Rules)
In a breach-of-lease clause, you reinforce your right to terminate the
lease of tenants who breach any lease requirement or house rule. Without this clause, tenants may sometimes believe that if you accept the
rent, you waive your enforcement of other tenant violations. Together,
the nonwaiver and breach-of-lease clauses impress on tenants their obligation to comply 100 percent—or suffer the consequences of eviction.

No Representations (Full Agreement)
On occasion tenants may try to get out of their lease obligations by
claiming you misled them with false promises. They could claim that you

260

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

got them to sign their lease by promising to completely paint and recarpet their unit. You know the
Don’t permit your
tenants are lying, but a judge may not. To the judge,
tenant to accuse
it’s your word against theirs.
you of making
To prevent this charade, include a clause stating that the lease and its addendums covers the full
false promises.
extent of the rental agreement. This clause could
also state that the tenants have not relied on any oral
or written representations or promises that are not explicitly written
into the lease.

Arbitration or Mediation
In many cities, the legal process is too slow, expensive, complex, and
cumbersome to effect timely and affordable justice. As a result, some
property owners write an arbitration (or mediation) clause in their
leases. This clause steers unresolved owner-tenant disputes away from
the courthouse and into a more informal hearing.
Before you adopt such a clause for your leases, investigate how well
arbitration (mediation) works in your area. Learn whether your local
courts show any noticeable bias for or against property owners. Arbitration and mediation tend to work best for investors faced with courts that
generally side with tenants. (Unfortunately, some pro-tenant judges—at
the urging of lawyers who fear a loss of business—refuse to enforce
lease arbitration clauses.)

Attorney Fees (Who Pays?)
“Standard” preprinted leases often include an “attorney fees” clause that
strongly favors property owners. In cases where you prevail in court,
this clause requires losing tenants to pay your “reasonable” attorney and
court costs. In contrast, when your tenants prevail, the clause (through
its silence) leaves attorney fees and costs on the shoulders of each party
who incurred them.
Those courts that still honor the principle that “judges shall not
rewrite lawful contracts” will generally enforce this one-sided attorney
fees clause. These courts reason that any tenant who wanted to modify

Craft Your Lease to Increase Proﬁts

261

or eliminate this clause was free to negotiate the
point prior to signing the lease.
On the other hand, so-called activist judges
enforce a
may use this clause to declare you liable for a winlandlord’s onening tenant’s attorney fees and costs. These judges
sided attorney fees
hold that “what’s good for the goose is good for the
gander.” These judges often lean toward the leftclause.
wing mindset of “powerful greedy landlords” versus
“powerless victimized tenants.” They see it as their
duty to upset this supposed imbalance of power by placing their thumb
on the scales of justice in favor of tenants.
So, do not place any attorney fees clause in your leases until you explore its practical and legal implications in your locale. Learn from the
experiences of other real estate investors.
Some judges won’t

Written Notice to Remedy
A “written notice to remedy” requires an owner (or tenant) to give written notice prior to taking legal action to enforce a lease provision that
the tenant (or owner) is currently breaching. From your perspective,
written notice can help you in two ways: (1) When you wish to evict a
tenant for cause, previous written notices lay a paper trail that supports
your case; and (2) if in defense of an eviction (or suit for rent) a tenant
falsely claims, “We didn’t have any heat for most of January,” you can
force the tenants to prove that they sent you written notice of this problem. Because their claim lacks truth, their defense fails.

Landlording: Pros and Cons
From the preceding collection of lease clauses, you might say,“Forget it!
Landlording involves too many potential headaches and risks.” But imagine reading a list of laws, regulations, accidents, breakdowns, repairs, lawsuits, hassles, and expenses that you face when driving a car. By focusing
only on the risks of driving, you might put your car in a garage and leave
it there permanently.

262

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

When I point out potential sources of trouble,
I
don’t
mean to scare you away from owning inOnly possibilities
come properties; rather, I want to present possibilito prevent, not
ties for your concern. It is the naive and unknowing
probabilities to
investors who most often experience landlording
difﬁculties.
fear.
Think of these concerns as possibilities to prepare for and guard against, not as probabilities certain
to make your life a constant source of aggravation. They won’t—unless
you let them. Indeed, to own a smooth, trouble-free investment, simply follow the 12 secrets of successful landlording.

C H A P T E R

18

The 12 Secrets of
Successful Landlording

You’ve undoubtedly heard the horror stories about managing rental
properties. According to popular lore—mostly propagated by people
who have never owned properties—managing rentals will require you
to answer 2:00 A.M. phone calls from irate tenants, ﬁx leaky plumbing on
Saturday mornings, and chase after deadbeats.
You may have even seen the movie Paciﬁc Heights. In that rentalproperty horror ﬁlm, Michael Keaton plays a demented tenant who viciously torments his landlords (a naive young couple played by Melanie
Grifﬁth and Matthew Modine). In the end, the couple triumphs, but
Keaton’s character puts them through so much grief that they begin to
question their own sanity (see Box 18.1).

The Good News
The good news is that neither popular lore nor Paciﬁc Heights paints an
accurate picture of landlording—which I prefer to redeﬁne as “providing
homes for good people.” Think of any commonplace activity from jogging to taking a ﬂight on an airline. At times, bad things do happen. But
the beneﬁts far outweigh the risks. The same is true of landlording.
263

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

264

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

They failed to obtain a prepurchase property inspection.
They failed to reasonably anticipate repair and renovation expenses.
They stretched so far to buy that they exhausted all of their
cash and credit.
They believed their tenant’s ﬁsh story.
They permitted their tenant to bring in an unapproved “guest.”
They failed to get the cash before their tenant took possession
of their rental unit.
They did not understand San Francisco’s onerous tenants’
rights laws.
They relied on the legal system to promote justice.
They failed to immediately consult a lawyer when their legal
situation went awry.
They used (illegal) self-help tactics to encourage the tenant to
move.

The good news: Did these beginning investors do anything
right? Absolutely—they bought real estate. Had they continued to
own that Paciﬁc Heights property, they could sell it today for a price
$2 million higher than what they paid for it in 1991 (when the
movie was ﬁlmed).

Box 18.1 The Paciﬁc Heights Investors Violated Almost Every Rule of Successful Landlording

Your management
system can give
you wealth
without worry.

Yet even if the horror stories did reﬂect everyday experience, the great wealth-building power of
properties would more than compensate you for
the aggravation.
Fortunately, owning rentals need not cause you
hassles and headaches. To gain the beneﬁts of property ownership without work and worry, you can either hire a property manager or develop a ﬁrst-class
system of self-management.

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

265

Hired Management versus Self-Management
More than likely, you think the task of property management includes
cleaning the rental unit, advertising vacancies, showing vacancies to
prospects, collecting rents, handling yard work, making repairs, and numerous other chores.
While it’s true that someone does need to keep the routine rental
operations running smoothly, that someone does not need to be you.

Employ a Caretaker or Property Management Company
You can delegate to either a caretaker or a property management company whatever duties you choose to avoid. As a true manager you’re responsible for supervising the work of others, not doing everything
yourself. As the leadership consultant, Phil Van Hooser, says,“A good manager is not someone who can do the work of 10 people. It’s someone
who can get 10 people to work.”
The best owner-manager is the person who
A good manager
knows what needs to be done and then directs the
performance of others. When delegating everyday
manages.
activities, I prefer to work with caretakers.
What Is a Caretaker? A property caretaker looks after as many details of a rental property’s operations as you wish to delegate. My caretakers have done everything from renting apartments to supervising
tradespeople to dealing with routine maintenance.
Yet, even though my caretakers typically look after details, I handle
market strategy, major improvements, and all policies and procedures. In
other words, I manage my properties, but rarely get involved in the dayto-day issues.
Over the years, I have found two types of caretakers work best:
A qualiﬁed tenant. A well-qualiﬁed tenant who knows basic property maintenance and can deal effectively with people makes a
good caretaker. Generally, I provide my caretakers free (or
partial) rent plus an hourly fee for special jobs (repairs, improvements) that fall outside their normal scope of their responsibilities. (No ﬁrm rules apply here because I vary the
responsibilities according to the competencies and time commitment of each speciﬁc caretaker that I have hired.)

266

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

A jack-of-all-trades. Another type of caretaker that I prefer is the
retired or semiretired jack-of-all-trades. In my experience, older
people tend to show a strong work ethic and good sense of personal responsibility. They also tend to know more about how to
remedy speciﬁc repair problems.
Again, the scope of our work agreement determines the amount of
base pay. On average, I’ve found that $12 to $16 an hour will get me a good
person for the job. You might pay more or less. If you choose the caretaker
approach to handling everyday operations,you’ll just have to test the waters.
(I might add that I have never advertised for “help wanted.”To ﬁnd
good candidates, I depend on referrals and informal job discussions, not
formal applications for employment.)
Property Management Companies If you want to passively own
your investments, you can hire a property management company. Typically, these companies manage hundreds of rental units for dozens of different property owners and offer four beneﬁts:
◆ They talk with hundreds of tenants each month and (if they

choose to) can develop excellent knowledge of the rental property market.
◆ Because of their broad experience, they may have developed
well-tested policies and procedures that cover everything from
repairs to tenant selection to rent collection to fair housing compliance.
◆ They may be the ﬁrst to know when one of their clients plans to
sell a property and can give you heads-up notice.
◆ By managing all rental activities, your management company can
minimize the time and effort you devote to your properties.
For some passive investors, property management ﬁrms offer a
needed and desired service. However, using these services also may impose two severe drawbacks:
◆ No company that manages multiple rental units for multiple

owners will design a truly optimal rental strategy for your property. Property management ﬁrms develop policies and procedures to advance their own proﬁts and economies of scale. Your
investments won’t receive special treatment.

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

267

◆ As a rule, property management ﬁrms not only charge a monthly

fee (6 to 10 percent of all rent collections), but may also assess
extra fees for tasks such as renting a vacant apartment (one-half
month’s rent, for example), carrying out an eviction, and contracting for repairs or improvements. In total, these costs can
easily turn a property with positive cash ﬂow into a cash drain.
Investors who rely on property management ﬁrms seldom come
close to maximizing their proﬁts. They can, though, take life easy.

Self-Management
As a beginning investor, I encourage you to actually self-manage your
properties. When you build up your portfolio of rentals, you can then
gradually turn over more and more of the day-to-day activities. Overall,
self-management offers you these advantages:
◆ You will save money. You will eliminate the costs that you

would otherwise pay to a management company, and by selfcontracting your own repair work (or by doing it yourself) you
will spend less.
◆ Your vacant units will rent faster. Whenever I see a longterm vacancy, 80 percent of the time that property is being “professionally” managed. Management ﬁrms seldom work diligently
to ﬁll vacancies. They’re content to put up a sign, maybe run an
ad, and merely wait for a rental prospect to show up. (As you will
soon see, you can do much better than that.)
◆ You will learn ﬁrsthand how to manage a property. This
knowledge will serve you well even if at some point you choose
to delegate some or all of this work. Although I do not now get
involved in the day-to-day work of property operations, the
knowledge and experience I gained from my early do-it-myself
years is still paying off. If you’ve never done it yourself, how will
you be able to design (or critique) the rental policies and procedures of your property manager?
◆ You will learn about the market. When you personally talk
with prospective renters, look at competing properties, and
monitor vacancies and rent levels, you will build a valuable base
of market information. With that market knowledge, you can

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

268

choose the most proﬁtable target market of tenants and then
adapt your property, leases, and rental rates to display a competitive advantage.
For beginning investors, the beneﬁts of self-management stand so
far above your alternatives that even Robert Griswald, author of Property Management for Dummies (and owner of a large property management ﬁrm), advises,
If you have the right traits for managing property, and if you
have the time and live in the vicinity of your property(ies),
you should deﬁnitely do it yourself. (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2002, p. 14)
No matter which of these management choices you decide to
adopt, you can still proﬁt by learning the 12 secrets of successful landlording (see Box 18.2).

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Box 18.2

Before You Buy,Verify,Verify,Verify
Prepare the Property for Rental
Craft a Winning Value Proposition
Attract Topﬂight Tenants
Create a Flawless Move-In
Retain Topﬂight Residents
When the Market Supports It, Raise Rents
Anticipate and Prepare for Special Problems
Maintain the Property
Process Move-Outs Smoothly
Persistently Find Ways to Increase Your Cash Flow
Keep Trading Up
The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

269

Before You Buy, Verify, Verify, Verify
Good management begins before you actually close on your ﬁrst investment. You want to make sure you fully understand the nature of the
beast you are buying. You want no voracious alligators that will chew up
your available cash and credit within the ﬁrst few months of ownership.
At a minimum your prepurchase due diligence should include:

Property Inspection
Obtain a professional report on the condition of the property as well as
reliable cost estimates for repairs and improvements.

People Inspection
Talk with the property owner’s current (and past, if possible) tenants,
neighbors, contractors, repair people, and suppliers. Search for inside information that might signal potential problems (e.g., neighborhood
noise or crime, tenant dissatisfaction, persistent trouble with plumbing,
wiring, or roof leaks).

List of Personal Property
Many property sales include some appliances, window coverings, storage sheds, and other personal property. Secure an itemized list of these
items. Verify the list with current tenants.

Tenant Rent Roll and Files
You want the names, telephone numbers, and leases for all residents of
the property.

Verify Security Deposits
At closing, the seller should turn over all security deposits to you. Make
sure you receive an accurate accounting. Verify the amounts with

270

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

tenants. Remember, you are the person who will return these deposits
when the tenants move out.

Licenses, Permits, Zoning, Building Regulations, Occupancy Codes
Because all kinds of laws apply to rental properties, ﬁnd out whether the
property currently complies with these laws (or, if not, what you will
need to do to bring it into compliance).

Copies of Warranties and Service Contracts
If the roof, water heaters, appliances, HVAC, or other components of the
property are guaranteed in some way, get copies of the warranties or service agreements (e.g., pest control and damage repair). Notify the service providers and pay transfer fees.

Arrange for Insurance Coverage
In some areas of the country, property insurance rates have shot up and
some coverages have become more difﬁcult to obtain (e.g., mold, hurricane, earthquake). Before you commit to closing, go over rates and coverages in detail with an experienced insurance pro (not an ofﬁce clerk).

Prepare the Property for Rental
If tenants now live in the property you’re buying, you will need to comply with their existing rental agreements until the terms of their leases
end. Nevertheless, to plan for imminent vacancies (and perhaps a market
repositioning of the property), you will need to get the property ready in
the following ways:

Choose a Segment of Tenants
Remember, generic properties attract average tenants who pay so-called
market rents. Targeted properties attract topﬂight tenants and yield more

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

271

proﬁts (that result from some combination of higher rents, lower operating expenses, lower turnover, and quicker rent up). So survey the market
and decide the segment of tenants (Section 8, college students, seniors,
families, young professionals, empty nesters, other) you wish to appeal to.
You are free to develop a market strategy, but you can’t turn away
any member of a protected class for reasons related to any protected
characteristics such as race, religion, ethnicity, children, and so forth.

Clean and Paint
Regardless of which market segment you plan to appeal to, clean, paint,
and sharpen the appearance of the property. Both the interior and exterior of the property should appear well kept and attractive. Never try to rent out a unit that fails the
Apply the whitewhite glove test. Unless you’re enjoying a very low
vacancy rental market, dirty units will only attract
glove test.
those tenants to whom no sane owner would wish
to rent.

Everything Must Work
Verify that the appliances, electrical outlets, and HVAC operate as they
should. All windows should open and close easily. Repair or replace broken locks, doors, windows, and screens. Remedy any condition of the
property that signals a state of disrepair.

Craft a Winning Value Proposition
When tenants compare your rental unit to the units offered by other
property owners, they don’t just look at its cleanliness and state of repair. They also look for a variety of other items that can lift a property
above its competitors. They want a property that offers them the best
total value proposition. For example, your tenants might prefer any of
the following:

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

272

Owner Demeanor
Do you (or your rental agent) come across as a pleasant person? To
achieve this demeanor, play down the authoritarian “do’s and don’ts.”
Play up your “please the customer” attitude.

Pets, Furniture, Appliances
Can you better appeal to your target market if you accept pets or provide the units with furnishings, furniture, window blinds, or appliances?

Hot-Button Features
What desirable features can you provide that other properties typically
lack? Views, storage, parking, study area, open ﬂoor plan, roommatefriendly ﬂoor plan, soundproof walls, great kitchens and bathrooms?
Learn your tenants’ hot buttons. Then offer those beneﬁts that will wow
your prospects.

Lease Terms and Conditions
Can you craft your lease to suit tenant preferences (while still offering
you legal protection against defaults)? What lease period will seem most
attractive—weekly, month-to-month, annual, longer? How will you handle repairs?

Security Deposits
Many cash-strapped tenants would prefer lower deposits. Can you ﬁgure
out a way to reduce the security deposit without increasing your risks
(cosignor, lien against tenant’s car, phased payment, automatic transfer of
funds)? On the other hand, some tenants are quite willing to pay a high
security deposit in exchange for a top-quality property and perhaps a favorably priced unit.

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

273

Rental Rate
Learn the features, lease terms, and rent levels of competing properties. Learn tenant likes and dislikes. Then design and price your units
to give your target market their best value—yet still provide you a
good proﬁt.

Attract Topﬂight Tenants
This principle of superior management requires you to perform two
tasks. First, market the property effectively, and second, strictly screen
your rental applicants.

Get the Word Out
Most owners seldom think beyond hanging out a “for rent” sign and running a classiﬁed ad. Savvy landlords try to think of inexpensive ways to
quickly and directly reach their target audience. These techniques might
include networking, referrals from current or past tenants, info ﬂyers,
brochures, bird dogs, employer bulletin boards,
newsletters, or a college housing ofﬁce.
First, ask yourself, where do the types of tenReduce ad costs
ants I would like to attract currently live, work,
through referrals
shop, play, worship, or go to school? Once you’ve
and word of
thought closely about where your desired tenant
might be reached, getting the word out about your
mouth.
great homes for rent will be easy.

What to Say
Your sales message should go way beyond the commonplace listing of
basic features. It should include a beneﬁt headline followed by the hotbutton features that will pique the attention, desire, and action of your
target market (see Box 18.3).

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

274

Property manager and author, Robert Griswald, tells about one of the
lessons he learned about marketing rentals:
I once had a rental property located near a major university. The
property had several vacancies in the 2-bedroom/1-bath units. Because I was wary of renting to large numbers of undergraduate students, my marketing plan was to attract university faculty or graduate
students who I thought would have a roommate and be perfect for
the 2-bedroom unit. Although many prospective tenants looked at the
units, our actual rentals were very slow and our 2-bedroom vacancies
remained unacceptable. Clearly, I was trying to deﬁne and force the
rental market and prospective renters to adapt to my perception of
their needs.
When it became obvious that my rental efforts were not having much success, I began to carefully review the comments of
prospective tenants and actually listen to their needs. What I found
was that there was a strong market for faculty and graduate students, but that they preferred to live alone. The WIFM (what’s in it
for me) from the perspective of the targeted faculty and graduate
students was the desire for a quiet place to work or study without
roommates. With this new perspective on the needs of our prospective tenants,I quickly realized that I could market these very same
2-bedroom/1-bath units to this new target market.
Armed with this knowledge, I revised my marketing efforts
and changed my advertising in the college newspaper to read,“1
bedroom plus den.”This change led to an increased interest in the
property as well as a greater occupancy percentage. Just by changing the way the units were advertised, I found that I was able to
reach my original target market of faculty and graduate students
who wanted to live off campus.
Remember: Look at your rental property from the perspective of the most likely tenants. Then promote and accentuate the
features of your rental property that will be of greatest interest to
the market.
Reprinted with permission from Robert Griswald, Property Management for Dummies
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001), p. 70.

Box 18.3

Focus Your Ad on the Beneﬁts Your Tenants Want

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

275

Don’t Show the Property, Sell It
Do not assume that your prospective tenants will immediately recognize
all of the competitive advantages your property offers. Just as with your
printed sales message, your conversations with tenants should emphasize features and beneﬁts. Explain why your units (and your lease) offer
prospects their best value.

Thoroughly Screen All Tenants
Before any tenant moves into one of your units, verify that person’s
credit score, credit record, rental history, current and past employment,
current and past residences, and personal photo identiﬁcation. To get
credit information, you can either ask the prospective tenants to run
their own report at myﬁco.com and provide a copy to you, or you can
subscribe to this service as provided by a local credit bureau. You can
obtain the other necessary data from the rental application form.

Payment of Rent and Security Deposit
Never permit anyone to move into your units without allowing enough
time for their rent and security deposit checks to clear. If you can’t get
the checks cleared prior to move-in, ask the tenants to pay you with a
cashier’s check drawn on a local bank.

Never Accept Fish Stories
As a property owner, you may hear your share of ﬁsh stories as to why
the tenant cannot comply with your request for background information
and veriﬁed payment of funds. Nine times out of ten, you want that ﬁshy
tenant to get away. (Review Box 18.1. In the Paciﬁc Heights movie,
Michael Keaton always reeled off some ﬁsh story as to why he could
not—or did not—comply with the landlord’s request for references or payment.)
Let your ﬁshy
Do not let your sympathy (or need for money)
lead you into accepting a tenant who begins out
tenants get away.
with excuses that beg forbearance. If you do, I

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

276

guarantee that those initial excuses won’t be the last ones you hear from
that tenant.

Learn and Comply with All Fair Housing Laws
As an owner of rental properties, your advertising and tenant selection
process is governed by federal, state, and local law. To learn these rules
and regulations, stop by your community’s fair housing agency. Talk with
the staff and pick up their brochures. Also, learn how the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) might govern your rental policies and property features (companion animal, parking, entryway access, etc.).

Maintain a Waiting List
If you strategically manage your properties, you will never want for tenants. Your advertising or word-of-mouth referrals will turn up more willing prospects than you can handle at any one time. Keep these surplus
prospects on your radar screen. Create and maintain a waiting list. With
an active waiting list, your vacancies will fall to nearly zero.

Create a Flawless Move-In
Aim your move-in policies and procedures toward satisfying these goals:
◆ Establish cordial relations that will smooth the tension that fre-

quently characterizes a landlord-tenant relationship.
◆ Make sure you and your tenants see eye to eye on all rules that

will govern tenant conduct, property upkeep, and unit occupancy (e.g., parking, guests, alterations, cleanliness, tenant insurance, pets, names and number of residents).
◆ Put the property in make-ready condition.

Cordial Relations
As noted, your property make-ready should conﬁrm the cleanliness of
the unit as well as the working condition of all operable components of

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

Provide your new
tenants a
“welcome home”
gift.

277

the unit. Make sure the tenants will enjoy their
move-in week without need of complaint. As a special touch, give your new tenants a welcome basket
of ﬂowers, fruits, beverages, and snacks. If the tenants are new to the neighborhood, provide them a
map and a list of nearby shops, stores, schools, services, and restaurants.

Rules and Regulations
Do not simply hand a list of house rules to your tenants. Go through
each item. Explain why you believe the rule is important and how it contributes to tenant welfare, property appearance, or upkeep. Ask the tenant to sign a copy of the rules and put it in your ﬁles with the lease,
rental application, and background reports.
Remind the tenant in a friendly way that the rental agreement incorporates the rules. A breach of the rules means a breach of the lease
and thus triggers whatever remedies your lease provides.

Verify Move-in Condition
At the time your tenants move into the property, walk through with them.
If you have performed your make-ready, you should ﬁnd no broken windows, soiled carpets, or dirty appliances. Nevertheless, if you do ﬁnd any
damages that remain unrepaired, note them on your
move-in checklist. Once the tenants are satisﬁed that
On move-in day,
they have discovered (and you have listed) every ﬂaw,
ask the tenants to sign the list to certify the move-in
capture a video
condition of the property.
record of your
You might also videotape the unit on move-in
unit’s condition.
day. If a dispute should arise later, a picture may be
worth more than a thousand words.

Retain Topﬂight Residents
Now that you’ve ﬁlled your rental units with good tenants, what can you
do to retain them as long as possible? Fortunately, you can achieve that
goal pretty easily.

278

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

Keep Tenants Informed
Don’t let tenants come home to ﬁnd a backhoe noisily digging up the
parking lot or a pest control man spraying in their apartment. Notify and
explain to tenants when anything out of the ordinary is about to happen
on or within the property. Tenants don’t like it when you thoughtlessly
disrupt their lives or invade their privacy.

Develop a Plan of Preventive Maintenance
Emergency repairs not only cost you big dollars, they upset residents. No
tenant likes a furnace that won’t throw out heat, a roof that leaks, or a
sink that won’t quickly drain. You can eliminate
most of these types of problems by executing a proAnticipate and
gram of preventive maintenance. Don’t wait for
prevent repair
things to go wrong and then react. Instead, anticipate what can go wrong and then prevent (or at
problems.
least minimize the probabilities).

Expect the Unexpected
Even the best preventive maintenance programs won’t prevent every appliance malfunction or HVAC breakdown. So set up a procedure for dealing with these types of problems before they occur.
Make arrangements with reliable and trustworthy service providers.
Give their telephone numbers to your tenants with instructions of when
and under what conditions they should call.
For ordinary, non-emergency repairs, give your tenants a telephone
number that’s hooked up to your voice message machine. When necessary, ask your tenants to call and state their problem. Then acknowledge
their request within 24 hours. If warranted, repair within 72 hours (less
is even better). Nonresponsive landlords rank as one of the top three
tenant complaints. Make repairs courteously and quickly and your tenants will sing your praises to their friends (and your future residents).

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

279

Enforce House Rules Strictly and Fairly
Topﬂight residents want you to enforce house rules consistently and
without favor (or prejudice) among all tenants. Don’t let those few bad
apples spoil the entire barrel. Whether the rules pertain to parking,
noise, unauthorized residents (long-term “guests”), or mishandling of
trash and garbage, you must not let violators go unnoticed (and unpunished).
If you do, you will soon ﬁnd that your good residents will move out
and you will only be able to replace them with lower-quality residents.
Draft rules for the beneﬁt of all. Then enforce them against everyone
equally.

When the Market Supports It, Raise Rents
Since I’ve already gone over the topic of rent collections and late fees in
Chapter 17, I won’t repeat that discussion here. However, there’s still the
topic of how you should handle rent increases.
Whenever you raise rents, you run the risk of losing a good tenant.
Nevertheless, low rents depress your cash ﬂows and diminish the value
of your property. When you know the market will support higher rents
(i.e., when you know topﬂight tenants are willing to pay you more than
you’re currently charging), go for it. Raise the rents.

Verify Market Support
Remember, I said initiate a rent increase if the market will support it.
Some owners try to increase their rents even when the rental market
softens and numerous large-scale complexes are offering move-in concessions such as two months’ free rent or an all-expense-paid trip to
Hawaii. In the face of strong competition, unjustiﬁable attempts to increase rents merely prolong vacancy periods, promote unit turnover, and
invite tenant complaints.

280

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

Soften the Blow with Communication
When you do raise rents, provide evidence to justify the increases. Give
your tenants the results of your market survey of competing properties.
Let them know you’ve registered 16 names on your waiting list. Show
them how your property taxes, property insurance, and maintenance expenses climbed 12 percent this past year.
When possible, phase in your rent increases frequently and gradually. A 10 percent increase all at one time will chase out more tenants
than, say, a 4 percent increase levied each 6 months over a period of 18
months.

Do Something in Return
You can also dampen tenant grumbling and nonrenewals if you do
something for them in return for that rent increase. How about adding
covered parking, installing new carpets or appliances, installing ceiling
fans, or putting in a new security system? Naturally, you don’t want to
wipe out the money you will gain from the rent increase. But you will
create better tenant relations if you at least enhance the desirability of
the property in some way the tenants will appreciate.

Anticipate and Prepare for Special Problems
On rare occasions, even the best selected residents may run into difﬁculty. Divorce, accident, ill health, unemployment, and bankruptcy represent several of the more common problems that tenants may encounter.
If any of these setbacks affect your tenants’ ability to pay their rent, what
do you do?

Show Understanding and Forbearance? Be Careful
In my early years as a landlord, I was a soft touch for sob stories—real
and ﬁctional. Several times, with previously good-paying tenants, I offered forbearance. In every case, the tenants eventually moved out and
never paid the money they owed me.

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

281

That’s why my experience warns me to collect the rent every time,
on time. Otherwise, you should request (or legally compel) the tenants
to move. If your tenants need ﬁnancial assistance, refer them to a charity
or social services agency. Forbearance seldom pays off with a win-win
solution.
(This same advice holds for tenants who persistently break the
rules. If the rule is wrong, change it. If it serves a valid purpose, enforce
it. Forbearance forecasts regret.)

Negotiate a Voluntary Move-Out
When your problem tenant pleads or threatens, but doesn’t move out,
you might try to negotiate a voluntary settlement rather than get involved with the costly, frustrating, and often ineffective court system.
To entice the tenants to leave, you’ll generally have to forgive some
of the monies they owe you. In some instances (although I never have
done this), owners will even agree to pay the tenant to move. No doubt,
in some circumstances, it’s better to get rid of a tenant and accept a
small loss than to drag out a bitter conﬂict and possibly lose thousands
in rent collections and attorney fees.

If You Must Evict, Do It Lawfully
States and cities set the legal procedure that property owners must follow to terminate a lease and evict a tenant. This procedure normally covers (1) lawful grounds, (2) written notice, (3) time to cure or remedy the
breach, (4) the time period before a hearing (or trial), (5) allowable tenant defenses, and (6) the number of days the tenants have to move after
the judge issues the order to kick them out.
Learn this legal procedure as it applies in your area. Then follow it
precisely. Failure to dot all of your i’s and cross all of your t’s can get your
case thrown out. You must then go back and start
the process again. Never threaten or assault a tenNever use illegal
ant; change door locks; turn off the tenant’s water,
self-help tactics to
heat, or electricity; or conﬁscate a tenant’s personal
property. Follow lawful procedure. Illegal self-help
evict a tenant.
can expose you to numerous types of personal injury lawsuits and criminal charges.

282

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

Maintain the Property
Let me repeat: To attract and retain topﬂight tenants, minimize complaints, and enhance the value of your property, carefully maintain your
grounds and your buildings. In addition to preventive and corrective
maintenance and repairs, you will schedule three other types of maintenance programs:
◆ Custodial maintenance. Assign someone the tasks of yard

care, picking up litter, and washing windows. Keep your property neat and clean.
◆ Cosmetic maintenance. Periodically inspect the grounds, common areas, and rental units to freshen up their cosmetic appearance. Don’t ignore peeling paint, carpet stains, countertop
burns, and other types of wear and tear. Without consistent care,
a property will soon appear run-down.
◆ Safety and security. Always keep your eyes open to spot problems of safety or security. Quickly repair broken stairs, lighting,
locks, window latches, or doors. Make sure all smoke alarms
work. Ask your tenants to call you immediately should they discover any potential threats to safety or security.

Process Move-Outs Smoothly
Alas, all good things must end. At some point, you will see your tenants
move on. When that time comes, make sure that your move-out process
includes the following steps.

Require Written Notice
Your lease should require your tenants to give you formal, written notice
(typically 30 days, more or less) of their speciﬁc move-out date. This notice will give you time to get the word out to topﬂight prospects that the
area’s best landlord (you!) will soon have a unit available for some lucky
tenant. Early notice will also give you time to line up and schedule contractors or tradespeople to make improvements and repairs to the unit.

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

283

Schedule a Final Walkthrough
Do not under any circumstances postpone your damage inspection of
the unit until after the tenant has moved away. Always schedule a ﬁnal
walkthrough of the unit on the same day your tenants are loading up
their moving van. Compare the unit’s condition to your move-in checklist, photos, or video.
At that time, make every effort to settle any
damage claims that you think the tenant should pay.
Settle damage
If you’ve treated the tenants fairly throughout the
time they’ve lived in your building, you usually can
claims the day the
settle up without controversy.
tenants move out.
Owners who run into move-out problems generally have made one or more of these errors:
◆ They have failed to maintain the property and try to stick the

tenant with costs that were properly the obligation of the
owner.
◆ They have not monitored the condition of the unit throughout
the tenancy, and then during the ﬁnal walk-through, allege all
kinds of expensive damages.
◆ They try to charge tenants far more for cleaning or repairs than
the owners will actually have to pay to correct the problem.
With infrequent exception, I have found that when I treat my tenants with respect and consideration throughout their tenancy, when I
document their damages, and when I don’t try to overcharge them, they
readily honor their responsibility to cover the reasonable costs of repair.

Persistently Find Ways to Increase Your Cash Flow
Do you know the word kaizen? Tony Robbins popularized this Japanese
term, signifying “continuous improvement.” It means that you should
persistently search for ways to improve. Few of us ever perform at the
top of our game. Much of the time we get lazy. We turn off our creative
impulses. We fail to see obvious opportunities. We achieve much less
than we’re capable of achieving.

ONWARD AND UPWARD TO BUILDING WEALTH

284

Remember the Value Formula
Remember, every net $1,000 you add to your annual rent collections
boosts the value of your property by at least $10,000 to $12,000. Every
net $1,000 you eliminate from your operating expenses boosts the value
of your property by $10,000 to $12,000.
V=

NOI (Rent collections less expenses)
R (Cap rate)

Reread Chapters 13 and 14 at least once every several months.
Keep all of your possibilities for improved cash ﬂows clearly in view.
Even if you’re operating your properties today at
peak performance, markets change.
Over any six-month period, your competition
Stay up to date
can change. Your tenant segment may change their
with changes
preferences. You might even discover new, more
(opportunities) in
proﬁtable tenant segments to serve. The most successful investors persistently adapt and reﬁne their
the market.
market strategies and management policies.

Regularly Reﬁnance Your Properties
Because (in the early years of property ownership) mortgage interest
costs eat up more of your rent collections than any other expense, stay
in touch with several savvy mortgage brokers. Tell them about the costs
and terms of your current ﬁnancing. Tell them how long you plan to
own the property.
Then ask these loan reps to notify you whenever a reﬁnance might
make you money. Slice your mortgage payments by, say, $500 a month
and you add $6,000 a year to your cash ﬂows.

Keep Trading Up
In his classic book, How I Turned $1,000 into a Million in Real Estate
in My Spare Time (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1958),William Nick-

The 12 Secrets of Successful Landlording

285

erson ﬁrst bought a $10,000 property. After creating value with that
property, Nickerson then traded up to a $40,000 property. He repeated
his process of creating value and next traded up to a $150,000 multiunit
apartment complex. After just 16 years, through the continuous process
of creating value and trading up, Nickerson owned millions of dollars in
properties.
Although today’s prices in most areas of the country dwarf those of
Nickerson’s day, the technique of creating value and trading up still
works. I’ve used it. Most of the professional investors I know have used
it. Likewise, you can use it.
Creating value and trading up offers you the safest and surest path
to building wealth in real estate. If you get started now, experience
proves that within 16 years (or less) you, too, will enjoy a multimilliondollar net worth. I wish you good luck and good fortune. Call me and let
me know how you’re doing at (800) 942-9304, extension 20691, or
e-mail garye@stoprentingnow.com.

I N T E R N E T

A P P E N D I X

Throughout this book, I have referred you to a variety of websites that
complement or expand upon the topics covered. For your convenience,
I have listed below these and other websites by category.

City and Neighborhood Data
www.census.gov
http://stats.bls.gov
http://usacitylink.com
www.virtualrelocation.com
http://verticals.yahoo.com/cities
http://venus.census.gov
www.ojp.usdoj.gov.bjs
www.crime.org

Comp Sales
www.dataquick.com
www.propertyview.com
www.latimes.com
www.domania.com
www.iown.com
www.ocpa.gov

287

INTERNET APPENDIX

288

Credit Information
www.econsumer.equifax.com
www.experian.com
www.transunion.com
www.creditscoring.com
www.creditaccuracy.com
www.myﬁco.com
www.qspace.com
www.credit411.com
www.ftc.gov
www.creditinfocenter.com
www.fairisaac.com

Financial Calculators and Spreadsheets
www.loan-wolf.com
www.moneyweb.com
www.mortgagewizard.com
www.mortgage-minder.com
www.hsh.com

Foreclosures and Repos
www.brucebates.com
www.bankhomes.net
www.4close.com
www.all-foreclosure.com
www.homesteps.com
www.hud.gov
www.va.gov
www.bankreo.com
www.treas.gov
www.premierereo.com
www.fanniemae.com
www.bankofamerica.com

Home Improvement
www.hometime.com
www.michaelholigan.com

Internet Appendix

www.askbuild.com
www.hardware.com
www.bhglive.com
www.housenet.com

Home Inspection
www.ashi.com
www.creia.com

Homes for Sale
www.realtor.com
www.homeseekers.com
www.homeadvisor.com
www.cyberhomes.com
www.homes.com
www.bamboo.com
www.ipix.com
www.owners.com
www.efsbo.com
www.buyowner.com
www.fsbo.com
www.realﬁnd.com

Insurance Information
www.cpcu.com
www.statefarm.com

Law Information
www.lectlaw.com
www.lexis.com
www.lawstar.net
www.nolo.com

Mortgage Applications
www.interest.com
www.mortgage101.com

289

INTERNET APPENDIX

290

www.mortgagequotes.com
http://mortgage.quicken.com
www.lendingtree.com
www.fhatoday.com
www.loanweb.com
www.mortgageauction.com
www.clnet.com
www.eloan.com
www.iown.com

Mortgage Information
www.loan-wolf.com
www.mortgageprofessor.com
www.hsh.com

Mortgage Providers (Underwriters)
www.fanniemae.com
www.homesteps.com
www.va.gov
www.hud.gov

Real Estate Information
www.inman.com/bruss
www.ired.com
www.stoprentingnow.com
www.ourfamilyplace.com
www.realtor.com
www.johntreed.com
www.arello.org

School Data
www.2001beyond.com
www.schoolmatch.com
www.schoolreport.com
With hundreds of thousands of websites related to real estate and
mortgages, the above list only samples some of the most popular sites.

Internet Appendix

291

Nevertheless, if you’ve got the time and the will to sort through the data
overload that the web now offers, you can certainly make a more informed investing and borrowing decision.
Still, beware. Many sites do not provide accurate data, nor does the
data necessarily relate to your speciﬁc need. For example, neighborhood
data and school data are plagued with inconsistencies, omissions, errors,
and ill-deﬁned measures. Don’t accept web-based data as the last word.
Check and verify all information. The web does not reduce your need to
“walk and talk” the neighborhood; visit schools, shops, parks other facilities; physically view comparable sales; and drive areas you might like to
search out “for sale” signs.
On a ﬁnal note, I will admit that real estate investing can seem challenging at times. But persevere. You’ll never regret owning. In the meantime, should you have questions about your investing, give me a call at
(800) 942-9304 (X-20691) or e-mail me at garye@stoprentingnow.com. If
you e-mail me, though, please include your address and phone number. I
will respond one way or another.
Once again, I wish you the best and know that you can proﬁt from
the successes (and mistakes) of the thousands of people who in some
way have contributed to the contents of this book. Good luck and good
fortune.

I N D E X

Accessory apartment, 206
Aesthetics, 205
Amortization, 24–25
Annuities, 10
Apartment checklist, 190–191
Appreciation, 19–20, 184
Arbitrage, 175
Arbitration, 260
Assignment, 244–245
Assumable mortgage, 76–79
Attic, 204
Attorney fees, 260–261
Auctions
government, 156–157
private, 159–162
Automated underwriting (AU), 113,
118
Bargain sellers, 137, 141–142
Basement, 204–205
BATNAs, 232–233
Benchmarks, 227
Bernstein,William, 10–11
Bidding risks, 150

Brangham, Suzanne, 89–90
Brown, Les, 11–12
Bruss, Robert, 67
Budget, 13
Business plan, 97–98
Buyer’s agents, 234–235
Capitalization, 171–178
Cap rates, 180–181
Cash ﬂows, 23, 182–184, 283
Cash reserves, 53–54
Cash returns, 52–53
Cash-to-close, 96
Casualty clause, 242
Character, 38–39
Closing
costs, 242
date, 242–243
Cold calling, 139, 153
Commercial properties,
123–124
Compensating factors, 120–122
Competitive advantage, 186–187,
248–249
293

294

Concessions, 228
Condo conversion, 207–208
Condominiums, 28–29
Consistency, 37–38
Construction cycle, 171–173
Contingencies, 92–93
Contingency clauses, 244
Contract-for-deed, 73–75
Conversions, 27–29, 207–208
Cranky landlords, 133–134
Creating value, 184, 285
Creative ﬁnance, 108–109
Credibility, 230–231
Credit cards, 105–106
Credit errors, 45–46
Credit power, 37
Credit reports, 42
Credit scores, 40–42
Credit strength, 41–42
Curb appeal, 200–203
Cycles of history, 23
Debt, 118–120
Debt coverage ratio, 125–126
Depreciation, 30–31
Depressed markets, 173
Disclosure revolution, 136–137
Disclosures, 198–199
Discounted notes, 32–33
Distressed owners, 130–131
Down payment assistance, 101
Due diligence, 135
Due on sale, 80
Earnest money, 92, 240–241
Energy audit, 209
Entrepreneurs, 213–214
Environmental issues, 194,
246–247
Estate sales, 157–158

INDEX

Eviction, 281
Expired listings, 140
Fair agreement, 224
Fair housing, 276
False beliefs, 11–12
Fannie Mae, 63–64
Farming, 139–140
FHA 203(b), 57–59, 78
FHA 203(k), 59–61
FICO, 42–43, 49, 63
Final walkthrough, 283
Financial discipline, 53–54
Financial freedom 101
Fish stories, 275–276
Forbearance, 280–281
Foreclosure, 143–145
auction, 148–150
sale, 144–145
specialists, 154–155
speculators, 157
Freddy Mac, 63–64
Garage conversions, 204–206
Gentriﬁcation, 211–212
Goalsetting, 12–17
Grass-is-greener, 131
Griswald, Robert, 268, 274
Gross rent multiplier,
176–177
Guests, 250
Hard money lenders,
101–105
Helmstetter, Shad, 8
Hidden defects, 75
Home equity loan, 96–97
Home prices, 4–5, 7
House rules, 279
Housewise, 89

Index

Housing cost ratio, 112–114
Hoven,Vernon, 32
Income statement, 178–179
Inﬂation, 21–22
Installment sale, 73–75
Integrity, 122–123
Interest rates, 21–22
Investment club, 16
Investor’s lament, 18
IRAs, 31
Joint and several liability, 249
Land contract, 73–75
Landlording pros and cons, 261–262
Landscaping, 193
Late fees, 251
Lease, 243–244
option, 84–90
purchase, 91–93
term, 250, 272
Leverage, 50–54
Liquidated damages, 92
Livability, 199
Loan underwriters, 118, 122
Loan-to-value, 54–57
Loss mitigation, 153–154
Marketing rentals, 274
Market savvy, 189–190
Market value, 129–130, 180–181, 185
Martha Stewart makeover, 192
Master lease, 93–94
Millionaire Next Door, 100
Mispricing, 190
Morgan, J. P., 38
Negotiation, 221–235
Neighborhood entrepreneur, 214

295

Neighborhood turnaround, 26–27
Net operating income, 52
Networking, 137–138
Newspaper classiﬁeds, 138–139
Nickerson,William, 284
Noise levels, 198–199
Notice, 259
Nuisances, 215
Ofﬁce conversions, 208–209
Operating
expenses, 178, 209
income, 178
Other income, 203–204
Owner occupant ﬁnancing, 54–57
Owner Will Carry (OWC), 69, 73
Paciﬁc Heights, 263–264
Paragraph No. 17 (18), 79–80
Parking, 256–257
Partners, 97–99
Personal loans, 106
Personal potential, 8–9
Personal property, 239,
250–251
Per-Unit measures, 174–176
Pets, 255, 272
Pledged collateral, 106–107
Possibility impaired, 134–135
Preapproval, 110–112
Predatory lending, 102–103
Pre-Foreclosure workout, 164
Prequalifying, 110–112
Preventive maintenance, 278
Pricing properties, 174–177
Probate, 157–158
Property
management ﬁrms, 266–267
taxes, 210–211
Public records, 245

296

Qualifying
income, 115–118
ratios, 112–120
Quiet enjoyment, 252–253
Recessions, 173
Reed, John T., 32
Reﬁnance, 284
REITs, 33
Release form, 167
Rent credits, 88
REOs, 134, 151
Repairs, 257
Representations, 259–260
Revitalization, 212
Rightsizing, 195–196
Risk and reward, 10–11
Safety, 194–195, 216
School improvement, 215
Second mortgage, 99–100
Section 1031, 30
Security, 194–195, 216
Security deposits, 255–256, 272
Self-Improvement, 17
Self-Management, 265–268
Self-Talk, 7–9
Seller ﬁnancing, 66–67, 70–79
Seller mortgages, 70–71
Sheriff’s sales, 157
Short-sale package, 168–169
Short sales, 162–169
Sleeping sellers, 139–140
Special purpose use, 206–207
Split the difference, 231–232
Stage-of-life, 132–133
Standard contract, 236
Storage, 196–198
Strategy, 187
Student loans, 108

INDEX

Subject to, 79–82
Sublet, 253–254
Sweat equity, 106
Target market, 205
Tax
liens, 33
shelters, 29–32
Tax-free exchange, 30
Tenant
“improvements”, 252
insurance, 253
segments, 270–271
Tit for tat, 228
Title company, 72
Title quality, 241
Topﬂight residents, 277–278
Total debt ratio, 114–115
Trading up, 284–285
Turnaround property, 93–95
Ultimatums, 226
Upside down owners, 162
VA loans, 62, 78
Value
formula, 284
proposition, 271–273
Veriﬁcations, 187–189,
269–270
Walkaway fee, 92
Wear and tear, 258
Websites, 287–290
Win-lose, 223
Win-win, 221–223
Wraparounds, 83–84
Yard care, 256
Yields, 10

Over the many years that we've been serving real
estate investors, one of the most asked questions
on our site has been, "How Do I Get Started in Real
Estate Investing?"
People from all over the world have been coming to BiggerPockets
to find the answer to that question. While some might lead you to
believe that there is a simple answer that works for everyone, that
simply isn't the case. We've built this guide to help simplify the
process of figuring out how YOU can get started. Of course, this
guide is not an all-encompassing "how-to" manual about every
aspect of real estate investing, but a broad-stroke overview of the
best ways to start down your path to financial freedom through real
estate investments.

What to Expect in This Beginner's Guide
This guide contains eight chapters, each focusing on a specific part of your investing journey. If you can
master these, you increase your chance of building wealth through real estate and minimize the risk of
failure or loss. This guide will walk you through the following:

Your Real Estate Investing Education
 Before you start investing in real estate, it is imperative that you get educated in the important
concepts. There are dozens of ways to get educated and build your knowledge base, and Chapter 2
will focus on those areas in great depth.
1 | Ultimate Beginner’s Guide to Real Estate Investing

Choose Your Real Estate Niche and Strategies
 There are a number of different strategies and angles from which to approach the business of real
estate investing. The more you focus on one specific thing, the better and more knowledgeable you
become at it. This will be the focus of Chapter 3, as we dive deeper into looking at the various
niches and strategies you can profit from in your real estate investing journey.

Create Your Real Estate Business Plan
 As the ancient proverb goes, a house built upon sand is subject to collapse. By creating a strong
foundation that your real estate investing endeavors will stand upon, you will create a more
sustainable business that can weather the storms you may face. Chapter 4 will show you the best
ways to build that foundation to maximize the odds of your success.

Find the Best Investment Properties
 When it comes time to actually make your first investment purchase, it is vitally important that you
don't pay too much and that you invest in the right kind of property. Chapter 5 will dive into the
specifics of how to set proper criteria to guide your investment decision making.

Financing Your Real Estate Investments
 Paying for your investment is much different than paying for a loaf of bread - and the method used
can often mean the difference between success and failure in a real estate investment. Chapter 6
will dive into the various financing tools you can use throughout your investing career.

Mastering Real Estate Investment Marketing
 Regardless of what aspects of real estate investing you choose to focus on, you will undoubtedly
need to have a strong marketing skill set. Too many investors have the “if you build it, they will
come” mentality when it comes to real estate. Putting together the right marketing program and
allocating the necessary amount of resources towards it is absolutely crucial to the success of any
real estate investing business over the long term. Chapter 7 will focus on the marketing aspect of
your real estate investing business.

Knowing and Executing Your Exit Strategies
 How you plan on exiting your real estate investments is just as important as the way you enter
them. Whether you sell, rent, or exchange your property, it is vitally important to have a clear
understanding of your exit strategy options for any investment deal from the beginning in order to
minimize your risk. Chapter 8 will discuss these exit options in detail to help you plot your real
estate investing course.

2 | Ultimate Beginner’s Guide to Real Estate Investing

Are You Ready to Begin?
As you work your way through this guide, remember that this is not all-encompassing. It is a 40,000 foot view
of how real estate investing works and is designed to give you the basic tools to get past the all important
question of how to get started. As you read along, make note of any questions or highlights, and then come
back to BiggerPockets.com and search the site or ask questions on our Forums to learn more about anything
on your mind. If you're unfamiliar with our site, BiggerPockets.com is an online community of real estate
investors with the web's largest collection of advice for new and experienced investors and is free to join and
to begin participating, learning, and growing.

“Starting any new endeavor can be scary. Our goal with Ultimate
Beginner’s Guide is to help alleviate the fears of new investors by giving
them the tools they need to be successful in their real estate investing
journey. ”
Josh Dorkin, Founder and CEO
BiggerPockets.com
If you are new to BiggerPockets, start with our real estate forums. The BiggerPockets Forums contain more
than 1,200,000 posts about every aspect of real estate investing, updated hundreds of times daily. Search
through the site or create a new thread and ask any questions you might have; many of our 270,000+
members will be there to help answer your questions. Also, check out the BiggerPockets Blog, which holds
more than 6,000 articles from experienced investors in many different real estate investing niches, as well as
the BiggerPockets Podcast, now the leading real estate podcast on iTunes. These sources, along with
hundreds of other pages on the site, make BiggerPockets.com the largest source of real estate investing
knowledge on earth.
Within these chapters, there are numerous links to additional articles and discussions found on
BiggerPockets. We recommend you take the time to scour these, as they will help answer many of the
questions you've got and will explore topics that are sure to be important to you on this journey. Of course, if
there are questions that this guide or the articles do not address, please be sure to ask them in our real
estate investing forums.
If you are not a member already, please take a moment right now to sign up for a free membership on
BiggerPockets.com. Go to BiggerPockets.com/signup.
It is perfectly natural to be intimidated, but our goal at BiggerPockets is to help you overcome your fears
and your countless questions by providing as much free information as possible to help you make the best
decisions for your own needs.
If you are ready to begin the Ultimate Beginner's Guide to Real Estate Investing, click below to turn to
Chapter 1...

3 | Ultimate Beginner’s Guide to Real Estate Investing

"Ninety percent of all millionaires become so through
owning real estate."
Andrew Carnegie
Real Estate Divider Are you new to real estate investing? Learning how to invest in real estate doesn't need to
be complicated, difficult, or expensive. In this beginner's guide, you will learn how to get started investing in
real estate from beginning to end - with no hype, false promises, or pitches.

THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES:
 Can I Invest in Real Estate if I Have a Full Time Job?
 Do I Need to Pay Some Guru in Order to Be Successful?
 Can I Invest in Real Estate if I Have No Money?
 Is Real Estate Investing a Way to "Get Rich Quick?"
 What to Expect in This Beginner's Guide

WHY INVEST IN REAL ESTATE?
There are many different places you can stick your money other than under your pillow, including stocks, bonds, savings,
mutual funds, CD, currencies, commodities, and of course, real estate. There are positive and negative aspects of each
investment option, but since we're here to learn about real estate, we'll focus on that and that alone.

4 | How to Invest In Real Estate

One of the most commonly stated reasons that people give for
investing in real estate is that they are seeking out financial
freedom, but there are others as well -- of course, each person
will have their own personal reasons why. They are typically
seeking one or several of the following:
 Appreciation
 Cash Flow
 Depreciation
 Leverage
 Tax Benefits

The decision to begin investing in real estate is a personal one, and we absolutely recommend you make sure
you and your family are 100% committed before deciding to move forward in doing so.
For more details on these reasons, see:
•

Why Invest In Real Estate

•

Top 5 Reasons to Invest in Real Estate

•

Top 5 Reasons to Invest in Real Estate Instead of Paper Assets

Can I Invest in Real Estate if I Have a Full Time Job?
Yes. The kind of real estate investing you might see on television or might
hear about from a guru is not the only kind of real estate investing out
there. In many situations, that kind of investing is not even investing at
all, but simply gambling or speculating.
The truth is, there are hundreds of ways to make money in real estate.
Some of these techniques or strategies might require forty hours a week,

while others might only require forty hours per year. The amount of
time it takes to grow your real estate business largely depends on your
investing strategy, your personality, your skills, your knowledge and your
timeline.

You’ve probably heard the age-old high school guidance counselor question, “If you suddenly had one million
dollars and didn’t have to work anymore, what would you do?” The answer, it’s said, is what career field you
should be in. Would you invest in real estate?
If your dream path would be to open up a shelter for abused animals or to move to Aruba and train tourists
to surf, you probably should not be a full time real estate investor.
5 | How to Invest In Real Estate

That's not to say that you shouldn't invest in real estate -- you just probably shouldn't go full time.
However, you don’t need to make real estate your career in order to build wealth in real estate. If you love
your job, you don’t need to quit it to invest in real estate. You can achieve the same or better results as a fulltime real estate investor by investing on the side.

“One of the perks of investing while working full time is the
steady income stream to fund and support your real estate
investments. Don't underestimate the importance of this!”
-Brandon Turner
Community Manager, Biggerpockets.com

Advantages of Investing While Working a Full-Time Job
By keeping your day job, you have several advantages over full-time investors. First, you do not need to live
off any of the cash flow you make -- that's what your 9-5 is for. By reinvesting all the profits from your
investments, you can fully realize the incredible benefit of exponential growth. Additionally, you have a much
easier ability to get long-term bank financing thanks to the stable income from work, which can also help
increase and stabilize your wealth building.
Investing in real estate while keeping your day job can be done in many ways, such as:
 Partnering in a larger piece of property
 Buy-and-hold property with property

management

 Serving as a private or hard money lender
 Investing in notes (mortgages)
Real estate can be highly profitable as a career or if you're just
investing while working a "normal job." However, the choice is
yours as to which path you take. Don’t simply decide to quit
your job and become a full time investor because you read
about other investors who have been successful doing it that
way. Having a concrete plan for how you're going to proceed in
real estate is essential; we'll get into that a little later in the
guide.
That said, life is too short to be stuck in a job you hate. Choose a career that makes you excited to wake up in
the morning, energized throughout the day, and content when you fall asleep at night. If that desire leads
you to full time real estate investing, welcome to the club! Just make sure you are not simply building a
career, but building a future.
6 | How to Invest In Real Estate

Also be sure to check out:
•

BiggerPockets Podcast 006: Investing While Holding a Full Time Job with Arthur Garcia

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 008: Learning to Be a Profitable but Ethical Landlord with Al Williamson

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 023: Flipping While Work ing a Job, Partnerships, and Military Investing with
James Vermillion

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 033: How to Close 27 Deals in Your First Year While Working Full Time with Sam
Craven

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 037: Full Time Income, Part Time Lifestyle Real Estate Investing with Aaron
Mazzrillo

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 051: Small Multifamily Properties, Work ing a Full Time Job, and Training
Tenants with Mik e Sherwood

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 054: Investing in Under $30k Real Estate, Working a Day Job, and Good Vs. Bad
Neighborhoods with Lisa Phillips

•

BiggerPockets Podcast 058: Flipping and Wholesaling Homes While Working Full Time with Justin
Silverio

Do I Need to Pay Some Guru In Order to Be Successful?
Absolutely not. Countless investors have become successful without the
help of the guru crowd. The goal of many of these individuals is to sell you
on the dream of fast riches, fancy cars, easy money, and so on -- many prey
on people who desperately want to make money and often use very slick
and often dangerous (for you) techniques to sell you on their very
expensive courses, bootcamps, mentoring, training, etc. In fact, the tactics
used to get you hooked are very well documented, and there is absolutely
no such thing as a free lunch.
Keep in mind that there are many in our industry who benefit from the marketing of these gurus. Most
websites focused on the investment niche affiliate with them, making large referral fees -- often on the order
of 50% -- in return for marketing their wares. Additionally, a large percentage of real estate clubs derive their
revenues from products and events sold by gurus who "teach" there. And yes, they also get a nice 50% cut
for doing so.
Remember, real estate gurus are in the business of marketing and selling you on the dream. Through this
guide and the thousands of articles and hundreds of thousands of discussions available on BiggerPockets,
you can absolutely learn everything that you'd pay thousands of dollars to a guru for, and you can do so for
free. If you want to read an excellent article about the guru seminar trap, read "The Real Estate Guru Trap –
How It Works & 4 Ways to Avoid It." Also, if you find a real estate guru that you are interested in learning
more about, be certain to be careful, and check out our real estate guru review forum to find out the real
deal from other investors.
7 | How to Invest In Real Estate

That all said, they aren't all bad, and some of these individuals are very knowledgeable. Just remember:
caveat emptor (let the buyer beware). Do your homework and don't get caught up in the hype or promise of
secrets; there aren't any.
Also be sure to check out:
•

Purchasing a Real Estate Investing Guru Program? Read This First!

•

Don’t be hypnotized by the “Guru of the Week”!

•

Real Estate Gurus Promoting Other Guru Courses and Events – a Scam?

•

BP Podcast 017 – Finding Mentors, Facing Retirement, and Note Investing with Jeff Brown

Can I Invest in Real Estate if I Have No Money?
The simple answer is: yes, it is possible to invest in real estate if you
don't have any money at all. However, there is money involved in every
real estate transaction. The issue, therefore, is not whether you're
investing with "no money," but instead whether you’re investing with
"none of your own money." Investing in real estate without using any of
your own money requires using Other People's Money (OPM) -- learning
to strategically invest in real estate without any of your own money is
one of the most complex but important tools you can develop in your
real estate investing career.
The key to investing in real estate without any money of your own is simple: bring something to the table. If
you lack money, there are other things you can bring to the table in a transaction -- if structured correctly -including education, time, connections, confidence, intelligence, and creativity. By reading this guide, you are
already taking steps toward building your strengths in those areas.
Many investors use little or none of their own money when investing in real estate by using one of several
methods that include:
 Wholesaling
 Using partners
 Using lease option strategies
 Via FHA 3.5% down payment loans
 Using USDA or VA no-down payment loans
 With home equity loans or lines of credit
 Using private/hard money.

8 | How to Invest In Real Estate

We will look at each of these areas in more depth later in this guide, but we want you to recognize that
investing in real estate without income is possible, but may not be as easy as the gurus would have you
believe.
For more information on investing in real estate without any money, please see:
•

5 Ways to Start with No Money and No Credit?

•

How to Close a Subject-To Deal with No Money Down

•

Can You Really Flip Houses With No Money?

•

Forum Discussion: Wholesaling With No Money Down

•

Flipping, Marketing, and Wholesaling with Danny Johnson

•

BP Podcast 050: Getting Started and No Money Down House Flipping with Mike Simmons

Working in Real Estate Without Investing at All
Many would-be real estate investors get their start by simply working in the real estate industry – earning
money while gaining a solid hands-on education. Here is a brief list (far from exhaustive) of careers you can
take on to learn the real estate business:
 Real Estate Agent
 Mortgage Broker
 Appraiser
 Construction Worker
 Resident Manager
 Title/Escrow Agent
 Project Manager
If you are looking to get into real estate investing with no experience and no money, choosing one of these
careers may be a great way to get your feet wet in the industry and to help you begin plotting your career
into full time real estate investing. The experience you'll gain from mastering one or several of the other
trades in the industry can be invaluable in helping you be successful.

Is Real Estate Investing a Way to "Get Rich Quick?"
How many late-night real estate infomercials have you seen where the real estate guru is sipping drinks on
the back porch of his beachside home, next to beautiful women in expensive (or minimal) clothing, telling
you that this life is for you?
9 | How to Invest In Real Estate

No doubt one of the largest draws to real estate investing is the image of investors driving fancy cars, living in
large homes, and being all around "rich." While many real estate investors do build significant wealth over
their career, real estate investing is not a "get rich quick" scheme. Yes – there are some who make a lot of
money in a short time; however, these situations are generally the exception, not the rule.
Investing in real estate takes planning, patience, and persistence. Don't expect to make millions of dollars in
your first year. Instead, plan on creating a business through real estate that will grow steadily year after year
to enable you to meet your financial goals -- and hopefully your dreams. No matter what you might hear
otherwise, being successful in real estate requires hard work, just like it does in any other field. It is also
important to know that there are no shortcuts to being successful in real estate -- there are no products or
tools that will do the work for you, either. You must learn the fundamentals and then apply them. Of course,
our goal here is to help you with that.
For more information on "get rich quick" investing see:
 If You're Not Building Wealth – You Might Be in

The Wrong Game

 Forum Discussion: Real Estate: A Get Rich Slow

Business.

 Slow and Steady Wins the Race
 FAST Nickels vs. SLOW Dimes: As a Real Estate

Investor, Which is Better?

Moving On
By the end of this chapter, you should have a clear vision for why real estate can and should be an important
step for building wealth for your future. Whether you decide to go full time or just invest on the side, real
estate can be the path toward financial future for you and your family. In the next chapter, we are going to
look at the very first step (and one of the most important) you should take on your journey: your education.
When you are ready, turn to Chapter 2 and let's get you on your way to starting out in real estate.

10 | How to Invest In Real Estate

"A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step."
Lao-tzu

This chapter is very important in your real estate investing
journey. Without a clear understanding of the principles found
in this chapter, you are at a much higher risk of failure and
defeat in your real estate dealings. In fact, if you only
remember one chapter in this entire guide, we sincerely hope
it's this one. Let this be your first step to a successful future in
the real estate investing world.

In this chapter, we'll cover:
 Don't Skip Your Real Estate Education
 Real Estate Terms and Mathematics
 Mentors, Gurus, and You
 Overcoming Fear
 Analysis Paralysis

11 | Real Estate Investing Education

Don't Skip Your Real Estate Investing Education
As we discussed at the end of chapter one, real estate investing is not a “get
rich quick” scheme. Just as any solid home needs a strong foundation, the
same is true when it comes to your real estate education -- a solid foundation
is key to a long-lasting business.
This guide, while not exhaustive on every aspect of real estate investing, will
help develop that foundation. We put it together to be a first step in your real
estate education – and as an introduction to the possibilities that come with
real estate investment.
There are many different ways to get educated in real estate investing, and
you don't need to pay hundreds or thousands of dollars to learn the business. Below, you'll find a list of a few
sources of real estate investing education; be sure to consider each before making a final decision on how
you're going to move forward -- what works for one person may not work for another.

Sources of Real Estate Investing Education
Books -- real estate booksAs the old saying goes, “Those who lead,
read.” Books are fundamental in gaining an education in real estate and
perhaps the most widespread learning method for investors. Real
estate books are produced each year by the thousands, and every
major bookstore in the world contains a whole section on real estate
investing. Chances are, if there is a way to make money from real
estate, there has been a book written about it. If reading books,
however, is not within your arsenal of skills, you are in luck. Today, we
live in a world where nearly every new book is also made into an
audiobook. (Try Audible.com for the web's largest selection.)

Blogs -- real estate blogsBlogs, short for an older term called a “Web log” are a
collection of short essays written about a topic. Blogs can be an amazing source of
information, and there are fantastic ones for every topic you can imagine. There
are many great ones written by people living in the trenches of real estate worth
checking out and learning from. Be sure to check out the BiggerPockets Blog,
which features dozens of expert contributors sharing their best tips and advice, as
well as the BiggerPockets member blogs (TK) for great examples of real estate
blogs. You can also see a list of BiggerPockets' “Top 35 Real Estate Blogs” and discover new favorites.
Mentors -- real estate mentorsPerhaps the most powerful way to gain a good education in any field of study
is through a mentor -- and the same holds true in real estate. While there are dozens of professional real
estate mentors who charge for their service, there are also millions of mentors all over the world that will
cost you as little as a cup of coffee - they are your local investors. People enjoy sharing what they know, and
12 | Real Estate Investing Education

seasoned real estate investors are no different. By introducing yourself to a successful
local real estate investor who you would like to become more like, you'll have the
opportunity to learn from someone in the field who knows your market and who can
ultimately become a partner as you come to become successful yourself. We'll talk more
about mentors later in this chapter.

Podcasts -- real estate podcastsOne of the newest innovations in the world of real estate
investor education is the Podcast. A podcast is simply a recorded audio program, similar to a
radio show, that can be produced by anyone with a computer and a microphone. There have
been a number of great podcasts that have emerged in the last few years. If you have a
smartphone or MP3 player, you can listen to hundreds of hour long shows covering a wide
variety of real estate topics whenever you want – whether in the car, jogging, or lying in bed -for free. Be sure to check out the pitch-free BiggerPockets Podcast or search iTunes for other
options.

For more information about gaining a solid education, check out these posts:


Real Estate Guru Courses: Are They Worth It? Do I Need to Pay Some Guru in Order to Be Successful?



5 Books That Keep Me Focused As A Real Estate Entrepreneur Is Real Estate Investing a Way to "Get Rich
Quick?"



What Is Wrong With Paying For Mentoring, Coaching Or A Guru’s Program?



Continuing Your Education is Key for Real Estate Entrepreneurial Success



Real Estate Investing Education in the Information Age



Bigger Pockets Radio Podcast 003: Getting Started in Real Estate and Raising Money with Brian Burke



BP Podcast 011 : The Ultimate Beginner’s Podcast For Real Estate Investors

Real Estate Mathematics: No More Complex than Junior High
You don't need to be a college calculus student to
understand real estate math. In fact, most of the
math you'll need is grade-school level. This section is
going to quickly touch on some of the basic concepts
and math formulas you'll need in your real estate
investing career.

13 | Real Estate Investing Education

Income:
Income is simply the amount of money that comes in from a property. This math is perhaps the easiest of all:
simply add up the amount of rent and any additional fees that comes in.
For example – you own a rental house. The home rents for $1000, and the tenant also pays $25 for the use of
the garage.
Your total income was $1025.00.
Income could also include late fees, application fees, pet fees, laundry or other vending machines, or any
other value you receive from your rental.

Expenses:
Expenses are simply the things that cost you money on
an investment. For example, the garbage bill for a home
is $50 per month, the loan from the bank was $500 per
month, and maintenance was $100 per month. The total
of these three expenses is $650.00.
Your total expenses for this example were $650 for this
particular month. Keep in mind that there are many
other expenses that you'll face as a real estate investor,
including things like taxes, insurance, management,
holding costs, capital expenses and various others.

Cash Flow:
Cash flow is simply the amount of money left over at
the end of the month after all expenses are paid. To
determine the cash flow, simply subtract the total
expenses from the total income:

Your total cash flow in the above example property was
$375.00 for the month. Let's look at a few more math
equations.

14 | Real Estate Investing Education

Return on Investment:
Real Estate MathYour “return on investment” (also known as ROI) is a fancy
way of describing what interest rate you are making on your money per year.
For example, if you invested $250 and you made $250 from that investment
(for a total of $500) over the course of one year, you would have made a
100% return on investment. Similarly, if you invested $5000 and made an
additionally $2500 over the course of a year (for a total of $7500) you would
have made a 50% return on your investment.
The actual calculation for Return on Investment looks like this:
ROI = (V1 – V0) / (V0), (where V1 is the ending balance and V0 is the starting
balance)
A simple scenario for using ROI to calculate an investment return would be as follows: On January 1, you put
$1000 into a bank account. On the following January 1, you cash out the account for $1100. Your ROI on the
investment is:
ROI = (1100 – 1000) / (1000) = .1 (or 10%)
You start with $1000 and end up with $1100 after a year for a return of 10%.
These simple concepts present the foundations upon which almost all other real estate calculations are
based. The rest will come in time, but most calculations are simply related to these.
For more information regarding real estate math, please see:
Introduction to Real Estate Investment Deal Analysis (A great comprehensive blog post about real estate investing math)
Introduction to Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
Return on Investment (ROI) Versus Cash on Cash Return (CCR)

Real Estate Investing Mentors:
A mentor is an individual who comes alongside you to teach and instruct based on their first-hand
experience; they are someone who has lived the life before – walked it, talked it, and breathed it. Finding a
mentor and learning from those who have come before you is one of the most important steps you can take
in your real estate investing education, yet perhaps the most misunderstood. This section is going to focus on
what a great mentor is, how to find one, and it will look at the question, “Should you pay for one?”

15 | Real Estate Investing Education

Real Estate Investing Mentors in Your Life
In your life, who have been your mentors? I'm not talking just real estate – but life in general. There are a
number of different individuals who may have served in a “mentor” role at one time or another, such as:
Parents

Professor

Grandparents

Boss

Older sibling.
Among all these mentors, there exists a common thread that all these sources has: an existing relationship
with you.
These individuals were first in our lives through an existing relationship, and the mentoring relationship grew
organically out of it. It wasn't forced or manipulated. There was no formal “mentorship agreement” written
ahead of time, no payment required for mentorship, no force. The only requirement was the relationship.

How to Find a "Organic" Real Estate Mentor
Real Estate MentorsFor those who have been taught that the only mentors are the kind
that cost $19,997.97, the concept of an organic mentor is a profound thought. After all,
why would a seasoned professional real estate investor bother to help a newbie? "Won't
I just be wasting their time?"
There are a variety of reasons why a seasoned real estate investor might choose to help
a newbie, but the fact is, many do. Whether it's the dream of passing on their legacy,
having someone with similar interests to talk with, or the potential making future deals,
organic mentorships happen each and everyday. These mentorships are usually called
by another name, though: friendships.
On the other side of the spectrum, there are new wannabe investors who tend to
approach the relationship as if the mentor should be lucky to work with them. This
entitlement attitude leads many of these individuals over to the BiggerPockets Forums, where they proudly
announce that they are looking for a mentor to teach them all they know, but offer nothing in return but the
privilege of working with them.
In other words

“Hi, my name is (so and so) and I'm looking for someone to invest a significant portion of their time and
energy telling me how to get rich. I offer nothing to this relationship, but expect you to jump at the chance
because you probably have nothing better to do. Most likely, I'll just disappear once I realize I can't get rich
overnight, leaving you exhausted and irritated. So, who's first!?”
If you would like a mentor to come into your life, instead of your search being all about you and what you
need, seek ways to grow a mentorship organically. Try these tips for building those relationships:

16 | Real Estate Investing Education

Concentrate first on establishing a relationship with seasoned investors who you would like to learn from. A
mentor doesn't need to be Donald Trump or Robert Kiyosaki. A mentor can be the investor down the street
who owns a half-dozen rentals and works a full time job or an active BiggerPockets member who donates his
or her time to answering questions in the forums. The key is finding an individual who you want to learn
from in the field you want to enter. While you can glean a lot of information from any successful investor,
attempting to build a deep mentorship with a mediocre house flipper, when all you want to do is buy and
hold small multifamily properties, is probably not a great first step. Seek out individuals who are doing what
you want to do.
Make yourself valuable in a way that is meaningful (profitable) to the other person. What can you offer the
other person who you want to learn from? Do you have a free weekend that you can offer to help clean up a
vacant unit? Do you have web design skills or cold-calling skills? Value is found in many different forms to
many different people. Make it your goal to provide solid value to every relationship you have. Additionally,
you don't necessarily need to do everything for free for that person. If you are handy, perhaps just being a
dependable maintenance person who doesn't rip them off is enough to build that relationship. Maybe a well
designed website could be your value proposition. Whatever it is – remember: provide value.
Don’t expect anything in return. You didn't build your early mentorships (parents, grandparents, etc.)
expecting something in return. You built them because you were simply going through life. Provide value and
in return – you may receive something back – but don't expect it.
Always think “win-win” — Don't simply focus on what’s in it for you. Your mentor may be far more successful
than you – but that doesn't mean you can't help them become even more successful. As the popular phrase
states, "a rising tide lifts all ships."
Most successful investors are willing to help, but only after you have proven that you are worthy of their
involvement. A mentor does not want to waste their time. Being a mentor is a huge undertaking for both
sides, and no one wants to devote a significant amount of time and effort building a relationship only to have
it fall apart when the student gets bored. Prove that you are in this for the long haul by persistence, building
knowledge, and actively growing outside the relationship you are building.

Should You Pay for Mentorship?
Real Estate mentor The role of a mentor is to make the journey from
point A to point B a little quicker and a little easier. For many wannabe
investors, paying for a mentor is the quickest and easiest way to find a
mentor. But should you?
If you've been around BiggerPockets for any length of time, you'll
understand that it is our core belief that you do not need a paid
mentor or guru to help you succeed. There is a vast amount of
information out there, most of it for free, that you can use to learn
and grow as a real estate investor. Furthermore, places like the
BiggerPockets Forums give you the ability to ask any question you
want and receive answers back from many actual, seasoned real
estate investors. Think about it -- there are over 219,000 others on our
17 | Real Estate Investing Education

site, and many of them are active on our Q&A forums -- you can pay a single person thousands to be there to
answer your questions or you can just ask it for free and get answers from many of your peers who are
active in the field. We tend to believe that the input of many is certainly superior to one person's.
With that said, the choice to pay for mentorship or training is 100% up to you. The role of a product or
training from a guru should be to improve your processes and make your journey easier, not necessarily
shorter. The theory is, if you spend $500 on a product that helps you achieve $1000 in profit, then the
product is worth it. The problem is that most individuals simply choose to buy a product looking for a
shortcut and do not actually put into practice the lessons taught.
Before ever paying for training, we recommend that you first exhaust all options for finding a local mentor,
as we discussed above. A paid mentor will most likely be unfamiliar with the intricacies of your local real
estate market, while a local mentor will usually have a much better grasp. If you cannot find a local mentor,
next seek out knowledge via books, forums, blogs, and other sources. Besides gaining knowledge and
pointing you in the right direction, this also will help guarantee your full commitment. After all, you don't
want to pay hundreds (or thousands) of dollars just to lose interest next week.

“If you are searching for the right opportunity to grow as a real estate
investor, before searching the internet for the perfect solution or pulling
out your credit card to hire the perfect coach, search yourself. Make sure
you know what you are looking for, and why, and then match your
needs with the solution that fits and feels the best.”
Chris Clothier, Investor

When you have a firm grasp on the type of investing you want to get into – then, and only then, should you
consider paying for mentorship. Before you do, however, be sure to check out the Guru Review Forum on
Bigger Pockets, as well as the Better Business Bureau. Be very wary of shining reviews online from members
that show up at a site just to defend some program (these are often paid members of the organizations
themselves). Additionally, there are many gurus out there who simply exist to re-package free information
and sell it for exorbitant amounts, claiming to have secrets or some new methodology. Do your research
ahead of time to avoid working with these scammers.
Finally, before paying for a mentor or program, follow this one final step: Wait! Oftentimes, pitches and
pressure applied from the individuals promoting a program are effective at striking the emotional nerve and
as a result, can encourage you to buy out of fear or on excitement, rather than prudence. Wait a few weeks
to see if you are still as interested. Many times, when the daze from the salesman’s shiny new suit wears off,
the program is suddenly not as appealing. After all, there is a reason they want you to “sign up TODAY!”
Paid mentors can provide accountability (“I spent thousands... I better make it worth it!”) and good
information that is neatly packaged for easy consumption. Many investors do find success working with paid
mentors. Many others, however, do not. By focusing on finding local mentors, building your knowledge, and
18 | Real Estate Investing Education

researching your potential paid mentor before paying, you are able to increase your chances of finding
success and avoiding failure. Remember: there is not a product, coach, or mentor who can make you
successful. That is strictly up to you. A mentor – paid or not – is merely a guide to help you get down the path
as safely and quickly as possible. The choice to do so is up to you.

For more information on mentors, gurus, and paid programs check out:
Life Changing Mentors
How Do You Find a Real Estate Investing Mentor?
How to Find Real Estate Mentors and My Eureka Moment
I Can Do That! No, Sorry, You Probably Can’t – Wannabes and Mentorship
The Real Estate Guru Trap – How It Works & 4 Ways to Avoid It
Purchasing a Real Estate Investing Guru Program? Read This First!
Don’t be hypnotized by the “Guru of the Week”!
BP Podcast 017 – Finding Mentors, Facing Retirement, and Note Investing with Jeff Brown
BP Podcast 025: Four Newbies and Their Very First Real Estate Success Stories

Fear: A Roadblock in Real Estate Education
I never worry about action, but only inaction. – Winston Churchill
Fear For every successful real estate investor out there, there are dozens who were too filled with fear and
uncertainty to ever actually do a deal. If you are just beginning, chances are you have some fear as well – but
don't worry; fear is a natural part of life and is designed to help us avoid bad decisions and the consequences
derived therefrom.
However, fear can also stop you from ever getting started, and as a result, you may find yourself spinning
your wheels without getting anywhere. This purpose of this section is to address that fear, to teach you how
to overcome it, and to help you succeed in spite of it.

Six Steps to Help You Overcome Fear:
1.) Get off Your Duff.
If you are looking to real estate investing to save you from a job you hate, then you had better start working
to replace the income from your job with money made from real estate activities. Develop a plan and work
that plan everyday -- just like you would get up and go to work everyday for a paycheck. If you expect to do
one deal and end up on a beach somewhere with beautiful people all around -- wake up. Successful real
19 | Real Estate Investing Education

estate investors work hard, and you will need to do the same, but instead of working for a company you're
not fond of, you're working for yourself -- a blessing and a curse.
2.) Commit
Actions-process-stop-icon STOP buying courses and other materials or seeking out
mentors or coaches until you are committed to step number one above. If you are
not committed, no course, class, or trainer is going to get you any closer to your
goal. Almost every real estate course out there focuses on the mechanics, but the
real action is what’s going on between your ears. When you can get that under
control, it won’t matter what technique you use; you will find success as a real
estate investor! Realize that you could spend a lot of money having someone show
the mechanics, but if you are not willing to deal with the “conditioning” issue, you
are just wasting money.

3.) Start Participating
BiggerPockets is filled with knowledgeable real estate investors who are
willing to share what they know for free. Sign up for an account and interact
daily. Don't just lurk; participate, ask questions, connect with others, and
build relationships. If you are afraid to ask questions, then you are going to
be just as afraid to speak with a seller who needs to sell you their property
or to negotiate with a big city developer. Interactions are part of an
investor’s life, so the faster you can overcome this fear, the more successful
you'll be. Being visible to your peers online and off will ensure you're always
at the front of their minds -- and that's great for business.
4.) Learn the Lingo
Without knowing the lingo of a real estate investor, you will always be afraid of sounding like you don't know
what you are talking about. Once you build up your confidence in understanding the lingo, your ability to talk
with others and understand what is being discussed will grow exponentially.
5.) Learn the Concepts
Once you have the lingo down, you need to start understanding the concepts. If you can't adequately explain
what debt-to-income is or why 70% ARV is important in a house flip, you need to spend more time learning.
Fear is often a result of being unclear. Look back at chapter three to see ways you can gain more knowledge.
Additionally, once you have a good understanding, help teach someone else. Teaching others a difficult
concept will cement that concept into your own mind, helping you never forget.

20 | Real Estate Investing Education

6.) Watch Others
By assimilating yourself with investors who are involved in the same kind of
investing you want to get into, you will naturally begin to pick up on the
traits that make them successful. If this means working nights and
weekends for a local investor for free, then that's the price of admission.
You will quickly learn to overcome your fear when you help others
accomplish success, giving you the confidence to strike out on your own.
All investment has some degree of risk, and real estate investing is no
exception. While risk can’t be avoided, it can be managed through proper
preparation, which you have already begun by reading this guide. The
hardest thing to do in any new venture is to get started. At some point, you
need to follow the advice of Nike: "Just Do It!"

Analysis Paralysis
It's easy to get stuck in the world of “Analysis Paralysis.” These are
the moments where you research, plan, evaluate, research, plan,
evaluate, in an endless cycle and are paralyzed from ever actually
taking action. It's the problem of reading books without
implementing, reading blogs without engaging, and meeting others
without interacting. Typically, it’s due to fear of screwing something
up.
It’s easy to convince yourself that you don’t know everything you
should know before you start taking action. However, you don’t
need to learn about every single niche buying technique, and you
don't need to be an expert before getting your hands dirty. You
should focus on one area of investing and become an expert in it
and then move on to the other techniques and areas. We'll cover
the various real estate niches in the next chapter of this guide.
Once you know where you want to start, you need to learn the ropes. The BiggerPockets Forums are an
excellent place to learn everything you need to know about any topic. Ask questions. Learn the basics and
start planning. You might feel that you are not completely ready to begin, and you probably never will be
unless you take action. It will seem scary, and you probably won’t be able to answer all the questions that will
be asked by sellers and buyers once you get started. But because you took action, you will be in a position
that will force you to learn the answers to those questions -- remember, that's what this site is for -- which
will help when those things come up.
It’s so much easier when you're fearful to spend more money and buy another course or to spend another
month reading about what other people are doing. Doing so won’t get you anywhere. Get educated, get your
plan together and start taking action. As you do, you will quickly get to where you feel right in your new skin.
You will actually feel like a real estate investor. Your confidence will skyrocket, and you will become even
better at what you do.
21 | Real Estate Investing Education

For more information on Overcoming Fear and Analysis Paralysis, check out:
Advice for New Real Estate Investors Just Starting Out
3 Words of Advice for New Real Estate Investors
Overcome Your Fear to Get Started as a Real Estate Investor
Being Committed to Being Committed
Paralysis by Analysis
Avoid Getting Stuck in Real Estate Investing’s Paralysis of Analysis
Frozen by Paralysis of Analysis?
5 Ways to Overcome Analysis Paralysis

Moving On
Beginning your investment career with a solid foundation based on a good real estate investing education is
vital to the success of your career. There are many different ways you can learn and grow as an investor, so
choose the method you feel you can grow the most with and start learning.
The next chapter will help further your education by teaching you more important basics of the real estate
business, including different real estate niches and the basic strategies available to you. Once you learn
these, you'll be ready to start with the all important planning that we've been talking about.

22 | Real Estate Investing Education

Very narrow areas of expertise can be very productive. Develop
your own profile. Develop your own niche.
Leigh Steinberg
While at first it may seem important that you learn everything you can about real estate investing, in reality,
it is best to focus on two things: an investment vehicle and a strategy for using that vehicle. This chapter is
going to introduce you to some of the most popular investment vehicles, as well as the most common
strategies for moving forward.

In This Chapter We'll Cover
 Why Real Estate is Like a Box of Chocolates
 Choosing Your Niche
 Choose Your Real Estate Investing Strategies
 Buy and Hold
 Flipping
 Wholesaling
 Moving On

23 | Real Estate Investments

Real Estate Investments are Like a Box of Chocolates
Have you ever received a box of chocolates as a gift over the holidays? There are always so many choices,
and sometimes, you need to take a little bite of each one to figure out what exactly you're going to find
inside. In a way, learning how to invest in real estate is like that box of chocolates. There are dozens (if not
hundreds) of different ways to make money as a real estate investor, and it's up to you to choose the niche
you want to get into.
You might absolutely love some niches and
strategies, while others might make you shudder.
However, unlike that box of chocolates, as an
investor, you are able to get a full view of the many
different choices available to you, and you can then
choose the one(s) that you enjoy the most. Best of
all, you don't need to choose them all. Learning
how to successfully invest in real estate is about
choosing one niche and becoming a master of it.
This chapter is going to open up that box of
chocolates for you to sample and let you see some
of the most common niches you can get into when
investing in real estate.
Remember: Once you know the niche you want to get started with, you will be able to narrow down your
focus, become an expert, network with individuals within that niche, and begin building wealth by taking
action and executing a plan of action.

Choosing Your Real Estate Investment Niche
The following list includes the most common property types that you are likely to deal with as a real estate
investor. Each of these has many subsets as well, but remember, you don't need to know them all. This is
merely a list to help you get started understanding what options are available from a 20,000 foot view.

Raw Land

24 | Real Estate Investments

Raw land is nothing more than basic earth. Land on its own can be improved to add value, and it can be
leased or rented to create cash flow. Land can also be subdivided and sold for profit. Some investors choose
to buy raw land with hopes (or plans) that someday the land will become much more valuable due to
external developments like the construction of a freeway or from a development being built nearby.
For More Information on Raw Land, see:
•

Residential Land Development – Part 1

•

Developing Real Estate: How to Price Land for Profit

Single-Family Homes

Perhaps the most common investment for most first time investors is the single family home. Single family homes are
relatively easy to rent, easy to sell, and easy to finance. That said, in many areas, the rents derived from SFRs (single
family rentals) won't be enough to provide positive cash flow.

For More Information on Single Family Houses, see:
•

Secrets of Single Family Rentals

25 | Real Estate Investments

Duplex/Triplex/Quads

Small multifamily properties (2-4 units) combine the financing and easy purchasing benefits of a single family
home. Bought properly, these can cashflow quite well, and there is often less competition than what you'd
run across bidding on single family homes. Best of all, these properties can serve as both a solid investment
as well as a personal residence for the smart investor. Another perk of the small multifamily property is the
ability to take advantage of "economies of scale," as only one loan is needed to secure the 2, 3, or 4 units in
the property. One of the things that makes these investments so appealing is that most banks look at small
multifamily properties with four units or less with the same guidelines as a single family house, which can
make qualifying for a loan much easier.
For More Information on Duplexes, Triplexes, and Quads see:
•

Small Multifamily Properties = Big Profits

•

Financing a Fourplex Real Estate Investment Property

•

New Investor Strategy: How to Buy Your First Multi-Family Investment Property & Live Rent Free

Small Apartments
Small apartment buildings are made up of between 5 and 50 units.
Though the line between small and large apartments is not set in stone,
most investors typically draw the line between small and large apartment
buildings at around 50 units. These properties can be more difficult to
finance than single family homes or 2-4 unit properties, as they rely on
commercial lending standards instead of residential ones. That said, these
properties often provide significant cash flow for the investor who can
deal with the more management-intense nature of the properties.
Additionally, competition is generally seen on a lower scale for this
property type, as they are too small for large, professional REITs to invest
in (see below), but too large for most novice real estate investors.
Instead of being priced based on comps, the value of these properties are based on the income they bring in.
This creates a huge opportunity for adding value by increasing rent, decreasing expenses, and managing
26 | Real Estate Investments

effectively. These properties are a great place to utilize on-site managers who manage and perform
maintenance in exchange for free or decreased rent.
For More Information on Small Apartments, see:
•

How to Find the Best Commercial Apartment Deals

Large Apartments
This class of property -- Large Apartments -- refers to the large complexes
you might see all across the country that often include pools, work-out
rooms, full time staff, and high advertising budgets. These properties can
cost many millions of dollars to purchase, but can produce stable returns
with minimal personal involvement. Many large apartments are owned by
"syndications," which are small groups of investors who pool their resources.

For More Information on Large Apartments, see:
•

Anatomy of the Grand Slam: How I Made $800,000 on One Flip

REITs
REIT stands for a Real Estate Investment Trust. In
the most simplistic definition, a REIT is to a real
estate property as a mutual fund is to a stock. A
large number of individuals pool their funds
together, forming a REIT, and allow the REIT to
purchase large real estate investments, such as
shopping malls, large apartment complexes,
skyscrapers, or bulk amounts of single family
homes. The REIT then distributes profits to individual investors. This is one of the most hands-off approach
to investing in Real Estate, but do not expect the returns found in hands-on investing. You can buy shares in a
REIT via your stock account, and they often have a relatively high dividend payment.
For More Information on REITs, see:
•

Is Now a Good Time to Invest in a REIT?

27 | Real Estate Investments

Commercial

Commercial investments can vary dramatically in size, style, and purpose, but ultimately involve a property
that is leased to a business. Some commercial investors rent buildings to small local businesses, while others
rent large spaces to supermarkets or big box megastores. While commercial properties often provide good
cash flow and consistent payments, they also may carry with them much longer holding periods during times
of vacancies; commercial property can often sit empty for many months or years. Unless you are starting
from a very solid financial position, investing in commercial real estate is not recommended for beginners.
For More Information on Commercial Investing, see:
•

BP Podcast 004: Commercial Real Estate Investing With Frank Gallinelli

•

3 Things You Need to Know to Invest in Commercial Real Estate

•

Commercial Real Estate Listing Tools, News & Discussions

Mobile Homes
You can start investing in mobile homes with little money out of pocket.
Whether it’s a home in a mobile home park or on its own land, many of the
strategies used in other types of real estate investing can be applied to
mobile homes.
For More Information on Mobile Homes, see:
•

Mobile Home Investing with Creative Strategies

•

Mobile Home Investing: AKA The Moolah Maker

28 | Real Estate Investments

Tax Liens
When homeowners don't pay their taxes, the government (local,
state, or federal) can foreclose and resell the property to investors
for the amount of taxes owed. This can often mean incredibly
inexpensive properties, but be sure to do your due diligence and
don't just jump into this kind of investing unprepared. Tax lien sales
are complicated transactions that require research, knowledge, and
experience.
For More Information on Tax Liens, see:
•

Tax Liens: What They Are and How to Use Them In Your Business

Notes
Investing in notes involves the buying and selling of paper
mortgages. When a home is purchased with a loan, a “note” is
created explaining the terms of the contract. For example, an
apartment owner decides to sell his property for one million
dollars. He offers to carry the full note (thus allowing the new
buyer to avoid using a bank loan), and the new buyer will make
payments of 8% per year for thirty years until the full one million
dollars is paid off.
If that owner decided they no longer wanted to be involved, he
might choose to sell that mortgage to a “note buyer." Just like any
other real estate investment, many times a note will be sold for a discount when the seller is motivated to
sell. A note buyer will then begin collecting the monthly mortgage payments and will have the right to keep
the note or sell it again in the future.
For More Information on Investing in Notes, see:
•

Cash Flow Notes: 5 Steps to Investing Through "Lien Landlording"

A Summary of Your Real Estate Investment Niche Choices
We've just outlined ten different investment niches, or vehicles, that you can invest in to take you on your
journey through real estate investing. When starting out, it's helpful to simply pick one (or, at most, two)
niches to focus on and become a pro at that niche. You can always expand later as you get more experience
and knowledge.
While you can use any of these investment vehicles in your career, you must next learn an investment
strategy that you can apply to that niche. The next section will look at several different strategies that
investors use to make money with the various niches already covered.
29 | Real Estate Investments

For More Information on Choosing Your Niche, See:
•

Finding Your Niche in Real Estate

•

Real Estate Investing principles Using Focus to Build a Solid Business Foundation

•

Top 100 Ways to Make Money in Real Estate

•

BP Podcast 047: Apartment Complexes, NNN Leases, and Commercial Real Estate with Joel Owens

•

BP Podcast 052: Buying Apartment Complexes, Raising Millions, and Building a Profitable Business with Ken
McElroy

•

BP Podcast 004: Commercial Real Estate Investing With Frank Gallinelli

•

BP Podcast 056: Syndicating Deals, Investing without Tenants, and Tax Liens with Ankit Duggal

Choose Your Real Estate Investing Strategies
The section above looked at a number of different investment vehicles that you can use to invest in real
estate. However, when learning how to invest in real estate, it is not enough to simply know what these
property niches are. Instead, as an investor you will use a variety of strategies when dealing with these
investment niches to produce wealth. The section below explores three of the most common strategies that
you can use to make money with these vehicles.

Buy & Hold
Perhaps the most common form of investing, the "buy and hold strategy" involves
purchasing a property and renting it out for an extended period of time. It's
probably the most simple and purest form of real estate investing that there is.
Essentially, a "buy and hold investor" seeks to create wealth by renting the
property out and either collecting monthly cash flow or simply holding the
property until it can be sold for a gain in the future. Among the advantages of this
strategy is that during the time that you hold the property and rent it out, the
mortgage is paid down each and every month, decreasing your principal balance
and increasing your equity in the property.

One of the most important things for a new buy and hold investor to understand is how to evaluate deals
and opportunities. By far the most common mistake that we see new investors make with this strategy is
buying bad deals because they simply don't understand property evaluation. Other common problems
include underestimating expenses, making bad decisions on tenant selection, and failing to manage properly.
These mistakes can all be avoided, however, if you simply learn the business; jumping in without proper
education can be extremely costly financially and sometimes, legally.
To properly carry out the buy and hold strategy, an investor should learn how to properly identify the ebbs
and flows of the market that a property is located in. Ultimately, when they perceive the market and the
properties they are interested in to be at a low point (prices low, inventory high), the buy and hold investor
30 | Real Estate Investments

seeks to purchase properites. When the market becomes over-heated, an experienced buy and hold investor
will usually stop buying until they see things settle back down. During these slow periods, they may sell or
simply continue to hold their properties. Some buy and hold investors never sell a property, choosing instead
to pay the mortgage off and live on the cash flow or may ultimately sell using "Seller Financing" (see chapter
8 for more on exit strategies).

Check out the following image for a simplified example of how the real estate
market cycle works:

Ultimately, there is much more to buy and hold than meets the eye, but if you can learn how to evaluate and
buy good deals, find quality tenants, and manage properly, you're going to be on your path to running a
successful business.

31 | Real Estate Investments

For More Information on the Buy and Hold Strategy, See:
•

3 Key Factors in Buy and Hold Real Estate Investing

•

What Is Hybrid Real Estate Investing

•

Back to Basics on Buy and Hold

•

The Return Of the Real Estate Buy and Hold Strategy

Flipping Real Estate
One of the most popular tactics for making money in real estate,
due largely to the numerous shows on cable TV that promote it, is
flipping houses. House flipping is the practice of buying a piece of
real estate at a discounted price, improving it in some way, and
then selling it for a financial gain. In reality, the flipping model is
quite similar to the "buy low, sell high" model of most retail
businesses.

The most popular type of property to flip is the single family home. Following a rule of thumb known as the
70% rule, an experienced house flipper will buy a home for 70% of its current value less any rehab costs. For
example: Home A should be worth $100,000 if it were in good condition, but it needs $20,000 worth of work.
A typical house flipper will purchase the home for $50,000 ($100,000 x 70% - $20,000) and seek to sell it for
the full $100,000 when completed. This is simply a rule of thumb, and actual numbers must be verified and
adjusted to ensure a successful and profitable flip.

Check out the FREE BiggerPockets 70% Rule Calculator to quickly
check if a deal is a good one using this rule of thumb.

One of the key aspects in flipping a house is speed. A house flipper will attempt to buy, rehab and sell the
property as quickly as possible to ensure maximum profitability and to avoid many months of expensive
carrying costs. These carrying costs include monthly bills such as financing charges, property taxes, condo
fees (if applicable), utilities and any other maintenance bills required to keep the house in good financial
standing.
Flipping is not a "passive" activity, but instead is just like an active day job. When an investor stops flipping,
they stop making money until they begin flipping again. Many investors choose to use flipping to fund their
day-to-day bills, as well as provide financial support for other, more passive investments.
32 | Real Estate Investments

If flipping is an activity you want to get more into, we'd highly recommend that you check out the
BiggerPockets newly released book, "The Book on Flipping Houses," along with the free bonus book,
"The Book on Estimating Rehab Costs." These books can be fundamental in helping you learn how to
start a profitable house flipping business. To learn more about these valuable resources, click here.

For more information on flipping, please see:
•

Simple Things When Flipping Houses

•

9 Steps to Flipping Houses (Infographic)

•

Fixing and Flipping: A Business or a Job?

•

Six House Flipping Tips

•

BP Radio Podcast 001: Building a Successful House Flipping Business and Losing Millions with Marty
Boardman

•

BP Podcast 010 : Flipping Houses 101 with J Scott

•

BP Podcast 018 : Flipping, Marketing, and Wholesaling with Danny Johnson

•

BP Podcast 022 – Building a Marketing Machine, Spec Houses, Flipping & Wholesaling with Tucker Merrihew

•

BP Podcast 023: Flipping While Working a Job, Partnerships, and Military Investing with James Vermillion

•

BP Podcast 024: House Flipping and Deal Analysis with Michael LaCava

•

BP Podcast 027: Fix and Flipping, Wholesaling, Marketing, and More with Jason and Katherine Grote

•

BP Podcast 032: Luxury House Flipping, Finding Deals, and Discovering Your Niche with Will Barnard

•

BP Podcast 039: Dirt Cheap Land Flipping and Reaching Motivated Sellers with Seth Williams

•

BP Podcast 041: How to Profit Through Long Term Flipping and Lease Options with Douglas Larson

•

BP Podcast 044: Creating Systems to Flip Houses While Still Employed with Michael Woodward

•

BP Podcast 050: Getting Started and No Money Down House Flipping with Mike Simmons

•

BP Podcast 058: Flipping and Wholesaling Homes While Working Full Time with Justin Silverio

33 | Real Estate Investments

Don't overpay for your next real estate flip!
Use the BiggerPockets Fix & Flip Analysis & Reporting Tool to easily weed
out bad deals & estimate your next big profit.

Wholesaling Real Estate
Wholesaling is the process of finding great real estate deals,
writing a contract to acquire the deal, and then selling the
contract to another buyer. Generally, a wholesaler never actually
owns the piece of property they are selling; instead, a wholesaler
simply finds great deals using a variety of marketing strategies
(see chapter 7), puts them under contract, and sells that contract
to another for an "assignment fee." This fee is typically between
$500 and $5,000 on average -- or more depending on the size of
the deal. Essentially, the wholesaler is a middleman who is paid
for finding deals.
Some wholesalers sell their contracts to retail buyers, but most
sell their contracts to other investors (often house flippers) who
are typically "cash buyers." When dealing with these cash buyers, a wholesaler can often get paid within days
or weeks and can build solid connections in the real estate community.
Many investors choose to begin with wholesaling due to its reputation of being an easy strategy and one with
low start up costs when first beginning. Because the property is never actually owned by the wholesaler,
there are no rehab costs, loan fees, contractors, tenants, banks, or other complications. Wholesaling is the
most popular strategy taught by real estate gurus and often receives the most attention as a result, though it
is not as easy to become a successful wholesaler as they make it sound.
Wholesalers must continually seek out the best deals in order to have
inventory to sell to others and must have a well designed marketing funnel to
continually attract these leads. Wholesalers also must continually seek out
buyers for the deals they acquire. While promoted as a strategy that anyone
can do -- even someone with ZERO money -- you ultimately do need to have
financial resources to build your marketing funnel. That said, those who
persist in growing their wholesaling skills often find great success and a good
source of income while they grow their knowledge of other, more profitable
strategies.

34 | Real Estate Investments

For more information on Wholesaling, please see:
•

Don’t Start Wholesaling Until You Read This: Wholesale Advice from a Fix and Flipper

•

How to Start Wholesaling: Getting Past The Education and Into the Field

•

The Basics of Wholesaling For Beginners

•

Wholesaling Real Estate Basics

•

You Have a Buyer's List... Now What?

•

The Flippers Best Friend: The Wholesaler

•

How to Evaluate Wholesale Real Estate Deals

Moving On
After reading this chapter, you should now have a clearer understanding of the many different real estate
niches and strategies that you can use to build wealth in real estate. Don't worry if you don't know exactly
which one you want to pursue yet -- this is simply the beginning. Learning how to invest in real estate can
take time. As you move forward through this guide, you will gain a better understanding of the kind of
investing you want to engage in. Throughout this guide, we will give you numerous tips and sources you can
use to narrow down your plan further. As mentioned earlier, be sure to check out the BiggerPockets

Forums, where you can ask questions, and, of course, search the site to find any more help that you might
need.
You are probably excited to get started making money in real estate. Before you do, however, there is one
major step that will make all the difference between early success and failure: building your business plan.
Chapter 4 will explore this topic.

35 | Real Estate Investments

"Do you wish to be great? Then begin by being. Do you desire to
construct a vast and lofty fabric? Think first about the
foundations of humility. The higher your structure is to be, the
deeper must be its foundation."
Saint Augustine
No great building is made without careful planning before ground is broken.
This plan serves as the map for the development of the structure, without
which the building just won't come together. In the same way, carefully
crafting your real estate business plan is an integral part of your journey.
This chapter will focus on the options you have in building that plan and will
prepare you for your entrance and long-term success in real estate
investing.

This chapter includes:
 Creating a Business Plan
 Assembling Your Team
 Partnerships
 Business Entity Structuring

36 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Creating a Real Estate Investing Business Plan
If you were to get in your car and take a road
trip across the country to an area you have
never been before – would you just trust your
gut and start traveling in the general direction
you want to get to? Most likely, you'd take with
you a road map (or G.P.S. or smartphone, of
course).
The reason we use road maps is because
oftentimes the road is unpredictable, and the
right road may seem to lead to the wrong place.
Other times, the wrong road might seem to
point directly toward your destination. Road maps are created to show the easiest route, the pitfalls you
want to avoid, and special things to see along the way.
The same principle applies for your journey into real estate investing. This section is going to discuss building
the road map that you'll follow on your journey. In real estate, we call this a “business plan.”

What Your Real Estate Business Plan Should Include
Mission Statement - When people ask you what you do, what do
you tell them? This mission statement should clearly define your
purpose and should include the benefits your business provides. Do
your research and come up with a solid mission statement. This is
the “why” in your road trip.
Goals - Where do you want to go? What do you want real estate to
help you to achieve? If your goal is to make $5,000 per month in
passive income – write that down. If you goal is to flip four homes
per month – write that down. These goals may change over time,
affecting the rest of your business plan – and that's okay. Make sure
to put down both short and long term goals. By setting smaller,
more achievable goals, you'll give yourself something to always look
forward to accomplishing – this will help you stay motivated.
Strategy - There are hundreds of ways to make money in real estate – but you don't need hundreds. You
simply need to pick one strategy and become a master of it. That strategy (vehicle), if dependable, will carry
you through to your destination (your goals). If you are choosing to flip homes to generate cash in order to
save up enough to quit your job – write that down. If you are looking to build passive income from small
multifamily properties for your retirement – write that down. Don't worry if you don't understand or know
how you're going to accomplish everything in the plan. Remember, your business plan can and will change in
time, and as you learn, you'll fill the plan out with more details.

37 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Time Frame - What is your time frame to reach your goal? Be realistic, but don't
be afraid to reach, either. Do you want to retire in ten years? Are you planning
on quitting your job next month? Document your timeline here. You can do this
in accordance with your goals, as mentioned above.
Market - Define your market. What kind of property will you be looking for?
Low income? High Income? Commercial areas? As a beginner, choose an area
you feel most comfortable with. Most new investors should plan on investing
within a short driving distance to your home, rather than investing long distance
(unless your location makes it impossible). Doing this will help you to become an expert in that area, which
will help you more easily analyze deals and opportunities. It will also help you know the players in the area,
which will ultimately help you find partners -- and again, opportunities.
Criteria - Before you go out and start looking for deals, you need to establish the criteria which those deals
must fall in. You'll want to define your loan to value, cash flow requirements, max purchase amount, max
rehab amount, max timeframe, etc. (these are all items you'll pick up as we go further). One of the most
important lessons you can possibly learn is to stick to your criteria and walk away from any deal that does
not meet your criteria. It is very easy to become emotionally attached to a deal, but by sticking to your
criteria, you take the emotion out of the picture.
Flexibility - If you are not finding enough deals to cherry pick from, you can change your market and/or
strategy. You'll learn more about these areas of criteria in chapter 5. This part of your business plan is one of
the most important to fully understand and clearly define. Too many new investors get excited and buy the
first deal that comes their way. By having clearly defined criteria, you are able to easily reject the 99% of
properties that are not a good deal.
Marketing Plan - How are you going to create a marketing system so motivated sellers come to you? How will
you find the best deals that are listed? Will you use the MLS, agents, online searches, direct mail to lists, or
other means of finding deals? We will cover different marketing strategies
in chapter seven.
Financing Deals - How do you plan on acquiring your deals? Are you using
conventional, hard money, private money, equity partners, seller financing,
lease options, or some other creative method? Finding financing is often a
challenge in today’s market, and private money provides a tremendous
solution. Learn to attract private money, so you've always got a steady flow
of finance when deals present themselves. We'll cover this more in chapter
6.
How You're Going to Do Your Deals - How are you going to turn a
purchase of a property into profit? Clearly define the steps. Make sure to document all your income and
expense sources and prepare for the unexpected. You also want to prepare several exit strategies in case the
first one doesn't work out as planned.
Teams and Systems - Clearly define your team and the systems you and they will use to delegate and
automate tasks. Who will be on your team? Will you need an attorney, CPA, etc.? You don't necessarily need
to know who those people are, simply what roles you will need on your team. More on this below.
38 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Exit Strategies & Backup Plans - Having multiple clearly defined exit strategies is one of the most important
parts of your business plan, especially for new investors. How are you going to exit the deal? What are your
backup plans? Do you flip, lease option, wholesale, bird dog, sell the note, sell the entity holding title, rent
and hold, or some other technique? What is the end game? This needs to be clearly defined. Again, we'll talk
more about this in chapter 8.
Illustrate Example Deals - One of the parts of the business plan that seems to get new investors excited is
to illustrate the future of your business. What would an ideal, but feasible next ten years look like? Illustrate
purchases, cash flow, appreciation, sales, trades, 1031 exchanges, cash on cash return, and more, to
demonstrate what your path might look like. This goes somewhat hand in hand with your goals – it just
illustrates possible ways of making them happen. Additionally, this will change with time because, of course,
ideals are not real life. However, it is good to see what is possible.
Financials - Include a personal description of where your financials are today. What do you bring to the
table? Do you have any equity you can use? Are you starting with nothing? Document your current situation
and update it as often as it changes. As you move forward with your investments, it is always important to
have at the ready your complete financials.
One last thing – remember that road maps and
business plans are guides, not rules. A business plan is
meant to give you direction and to motivate you to
follow it. When you have a clearly defined business plan,
carrying out the plan and envisioning the end becomes
much more attainable.
It is almost impossible to follow a financial or real estate
road map perfectly. While you can plot your course with
care and extreme precision, there are still many outside
forces at play. However, your road map is designed to keep you headed in the right direction at the correct
speed. You may come across bumps in the road, dead ends, and even a breakdown or two. However, if you
hold as tight as you can to the map you've created, you will pass through those problems and come out at
your destination.
If you talk to investors who have failed in this business, you'll find that the majority of them did so primarily
because of a lack of preparation and planning. Don't fall into this trap.

For more information on creating a business plan, check out:
•

Outline of a Real Estate Business Plan, the First Step to Success

•

Are You Investing in Real Estate with Clear Intentions? Do You Have a Plan?

•

10 Critical Steps to Take Before Investing in Real Estate

39 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Assembling Your Team
While as an investor you are required to wear many different
hats, you don't need to (and can't) wear all of them. Instead, you
need a team. When we refer to “team,” we're not suggesting you
go out and hire a team of employees to work under you. A
“team” is merely a collection of individuals in various different
businesses that you can rely on help you move your business
forward. Here's a brief look at who should be on any winning
real estate investing team:
Your Mentor - Every successful entrepreneur needs a good
mentor: a guide. By training under the watchful eye of one
smarter than us, we can only get smarter. For more information
on mentors, see chapter 4.
Mortgage Broker/Loan Officer - A mortgage broker is the person responsible for getting you loans –
especially if you are going “conventional” (not hard or private money). You want someone who has the
experience of working with other investors, and you want that person to be creative and smart. Many loan
officers have a pipeline of buyers (or future buyers); real estate investors can use the help of local loan
officers to build a list of buyers and lease purchasers for their properties.
Real Estate Attorney - It is important to have someone on the team who can go through contracts and who
knows the legalities of all your moves. Don't try to pinch pennies by ignoring this valuable member of your
team. You don't need to meet for hours with your attorney each week, but want someone to be available
when you need them. Having an attorney who is skilled with real estate investing is highly important for the
success of your career. Keep in mind, attorneys can also be compensated through fees collected at
acquisition or disposition of a property.
Escrow Officer or Title Rep - If you live in a state that uses Title & Escrow
companies, your escrow officer or title rep is the person responsible for
closing the deal, taking you from "the offer" to "the keys." Having a good
one on the team helps to close deals that much quicker. You always want
people looking out for YOUR interests.
Accountant - As you acquire properties, doing your own taxes and
bookkeeping becomes increasingly difficult. As soon as possible, hire an
accountant (preferably a Certified Public Accountant). Your numbers guy
should also be well aware of the ins and outs of real estate and preferably
own rental properties of their own. Come tax time, this is the man to help
you through the write-offs. A good tax accountant will save you more than they cost.
Insurance Agent - Insurance is a must, and as an investor, you will probably be dealing with a lot of
insurance policies. Be sure to shop around for both the best rates and the best service. Do not skimp out on
getting insurance, as you never know when you'll need that policy.

40 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Contractor - A good contractor seems like the hardest team member to find, but can
often make or break your profit margin. You want someone who gets things done on
time and under budget! Be sure that your contractor is licensed/bonded/insured to
protect you. Don't simply hire the cheap guy.
Supportive Family & Friends - Having the support and backing of loved ones is
important in any endeavor. If your spouse or family is not on board, don't invest
until they are.
Realtor - An exceptional real estate agent is fundamental in your investing career. You or your spouse may
even choose to become a real estate agent yourself to gain access to the incredible tools that agents have.
Either way, having an agent who is punctual, a go-getter, and eager, is important. Real estate agents are paid
from the commission when a property is sold. In other words – for the buyer, an agent is FREE. They can be
an excellent resource for contract real estate work, which may include the following activities: bird dogging,
referring buyers, showing properties, open houses, broker price opinions, etc.
Property Manager - If you don't want to actively manage your properties, a good
property manager is important to have. A good property manager can be hard to
find – but finding one who can efficiently manage your rentals will make your life
significantly easier.
Great Handyman - Someone to take care of the little things that come up on a daily
basis is imperative to have on board. Ask for referrals from other landlords for the
best handymen; they typically don't need to advertise, but work almost entirely on
referrals from a small group of investors and homeowners.
One of the best sources for finding these team members is through referrals from other investors. In
general, another investor would be happy to refer their handyman, mortgage broker, or accountant to you
because it reflects well on themselves and their relationship with that professional. Try asking around at your
local real estate investor club or here on BiggerPockets, and you'll be well on your way towards putting the
pieces in place.

What Makes a Great Real Estate Team?
A great real estate team is defined by their ability to consistently produce reliable RESULTS. As you might
suspect, that’s WAY more difficult to construct in real life than it is to talk about it.
Investors, especially ones with either large portfolios or those who flip a lot (often both), rely on their team
daily. When one member fails, the entire endeavor suffers, sometimes to the point of sabotaging the team's
goals altogether. Whether you’re serving clients, flipping properties, or keeping track of your rentals, your
team must consistently produce and avoid the “Excuse Train” at all costs. There are those who do -- and
those who make excuses. The latter will pull you down faster than you can imagine.

41 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

“I found this business to be extremely difficult and frustrating
until I built up a solid team around me, at which point it became
much, much easier.”
J Scott, Investor
People talk a good game, so watch them when it’s their turn to produce. A great team member should exhibit
certain traits, which are sometimes difficult to see on the surface, but can be witnessed through longer
conversations and via referrals from others. For example:
 Are they really experts?
 Do they interact well with everyone?
 Are they a pain to contact?
 Do they return calls/emails quickly?
 Do they hit deadlines?
 Do they produce as promised, when promised?
 Can they communicate clearly and efficiently?
Assembling the team will not happen overnight, but once together, they will give you the backing and help
you’ll need to make your real estate investing dreams come true.
For more information about building and maintaining your team, check out:
•

Assembling your Real Estate Investing Team

•

Hiring Help for Your Real Estate Investing Business

•

Putting Together a ‘Team’ for Your Real Estate Business – It’s About Results

•

The Lazy Man’s Way to Flip Houses: Your Key Flipping Team

Should I Use a Partner or Go It Alone?
Before beginning your real estate journey, you will need to decide if you want to pursue your career on your
own or with the help of a partner. This decision is not the same for everyone and depends largely on your
knowledge, time commitments, abilities, talents, and timeline. If a partnership is something you plan on
pursuing, the kind of partnership becomes important as well. Some individuals choose to invest in real estate
with a partner from the start. Others choose to invest with partners on case-by-case, deal-by-deal basis.
The following chart will give you the pros and cons of using a partner vs. going through your investing career
alone.
42 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Partnership Cons:

Partnership Pro:
Team Brainstorming:

Personality Conflicts:

Two heads are better than one, so ideas can often

Partnerships can be difficult due to the possibility of

develop with more clear focus and direction, as

vast differences in personalities. When you are

multiple minds work through the same issues.

relying on another person to get things done and you
don't mesh perfectly, conflict can easily arise.

Pooling Resources:

Difference of Opinion:

Real estate investing generally takes a lot resources

Everyone has an opinion of how things should be

and can often be too expensive for one person to

done. If you are in a partnership, you are forced to

handle alone. A partnership allows you to pool your

compromise on many aspects of your business. From

resources to get off to a stable start. A solid

paint color to investment type – differing opinions

partnership may also help with bank financing.

can cause difficulty.

Assistance with Analysis:

Suspicion/Trust:

It is important to master the art of deal analysis

As with any close relationship, it is easy for suspicion

(which we'll cover more in chapter 5). There are

and trust issues to arise – especially when things

hundreds of considerations when searching for your

aren't going well. Trust can be hard to gain and quick

first real estate investment deal, so having someone

to lose. Fraud also can play a role in the demise of

else looking at your numbers will increases your

many businesses and partnerships.

odds of an accurate analysis
Complementary Qualities:

Delayed Decision-Making:

Different people bring different strengths and

When you are acting alone, you have the ability to

weaknesses to a partnership, e.g. analytical vs. hand

quickly make decisions based on how you want

on, construction vs. financing, time vs. knowledge.

things. In a partnership, you are oftentimes forced to

Understanding what each person excels at, and

discuss all decisions – no matter how trivial – with

harnessing that strength, is key for successfully

your partner, which can add a lot of time to your

working with a partner.

dealings.

43 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Task Division:

Smaller Profits:

When investing in real estate, there are a lot of tasks

When you form a partnership, your profits, by nature

that can easily overwhelm your life. Effectively and

of the agreement, are split. In other words – you will

fairly dividing tasks can ensure that all partners are

make a lot less money per deal than if you were

able to contribute to the business without being

doing it by yourself.

overwhelmed.
Expanded Networking:

Mixing Business/Friendship:

Networking with others within and outside the real

Oftentimes people get into business with friends of

estate industry is vital to the growth of your real

family - and many times that becomes the death of

estate investing endeavors. In a partnership, each

that relationship. Partnerships don't always work out

partner already comes to the table with their own

– and when they don't, the relationship is often

network of connections.

severed for good. A partnership is very much like a
marriage -- don't get into it unless you're ready!

Accountability:

Unrealistic Expectations:

A partnership, if both sides do their part, will help to

When you rely on someone else, it's easy to set

keep the business moving forward; you've got a built-

expectations on how something should be done.

in accountability partner to keep you to task. When

However, when the partner doesn't live up to your

one partner begins to falter, the other can step in

expectations, it's easy to be bitter and blame the

and assist to ensure the team is moving forward.

other person.

Confidence/Motivation:

Responsible For Partner:

Starting out in real estate investing can be

While the legal ramifications depend largely on the

overwhelming. A partnership can help inspire

entity structure you set up, you and your partner are

confidence and motivation when obstacles arise. A

still in business together, which means you are

good partnership can be revitalizing and motivating.

responsible for them, at least in terms of the
business. If they skip town, you are still responsible

Split Risk:

for the whole business. Make sure your real estate

As with any investment, real estate investing involves

attorney helps you draft any partnership agreements

a certain level of risk. Having a partner splits the risk

to help protect your interests.

(and thus, the profits) and can lessen the fear of loss.

44 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

"A friendship founded on business is a good deal better than a
business founded on friendship."
John D. Rockefeller
Four Tips for a Successful Real Estate Partnership
If you've decided that the benefits of a partnership outweigh the negatives - be sure to follow these four tips
to minimize problems:
 Don’t Be a Jerk: Treat your partnership with care
and have a giving spirit.
 Learn to Compromise: There will be disagreements
and conflicts in a partnership - and there must be
compromises.
 Talk Daily: Talk every single day, when possible.
Discussing daily events as well as future goals will
keep the relationship stable and validates the
reason you are partners.
 Plan Ahead: Do not start a partnership off the wrong way. Make sure the arrangement is
written, well planned and includes an operating agreement to detail the roles and
responsibilities, capital contributions, profit splits, and exit strategies.

The Bottom Line of Using Partnerships
While partnerships have a lot of benefits, they are not for everyone, and if not properly created, they may be
a silent killer to your investment plans. If you choose not to use a partnership, you are not actually investing
alone. There are thousands of individuals in the BiggerPockets community that can help you through any
weaknesses you may have. You can also outsource many of the things you don't want to do, rather than give
50% of your profits away. For example, if you are not good at construction, it may be cheaper to hire a
contractor than to partner with an individual who is good with construction.
If you decide to use a partnership, be careful from the beginning. Many people simply do not make good
business partners. If you decide you would like to pursue a business partnership, be 100% confident that you
choose a business partner who will treat you fairly, add value to the relationship, and maintain similar goals
to yours. Carefully plan out the arrangement (in writing) and constantly communicate. If both partners
remain committed to the business, you will likely develop one that is prosperous for all parties involved.
For More Information about Partnerships, check out:
•

Partnerships: The Benefits of Teaming Up in Real Estate Investing

•

Want a Real Estate Partner? Think Twice!

•

Real Estate Partnerships: Making Them Work!

45 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

Business Entity Structuring
It is important for any real estate investor to understand that
incorporating your business is almost universally regarded as one of
the best ways to protect yourself from personal liability. There are
many opinions about what structure to set up, when to create one, and
so on. BiggerPockets recommends that you consult with a real estate
attorney or accountant when making these important decisions. The
following are some additional sources about business entities that you
may want to check out:
•

Which is the Best Business Structure for Real Estate Investors?

•

The Asset Protection Misconception: Why Insurance Alone Isn’t Enough

•

Series LLCs and Real Estate Investing: A Primer – Look Before You Leap

•

Piercing the Veil: Holding Owners Liable for the Acts of the Business

Moving On
Without a proper foundation, your investment career is bound to show
cracks and can result in possible failure during rough weather. This chapter
was written to help solidify your foundation and give you an overview of the
different options you have in creating the strongest business plan possible.
If you have further questions about these items, don't be afraid to ask
questions in the BiggerPockets Forums.
Once you have chosen your niche, researched and educated yourself about
that niche, and set up a proper foundation to build your investment
property on, it's time to start shopping for your first property. Chapter 5 will
go into greater depth about the criteria you need when shopping for your
investment property.

46 | Creating Your Real Estate Investing Business Plan

"Make your profit when you buy."
Real Estate Mantra
Up to this point, we have focused on the preparation needed before investing. However, as we've discussed
earlier in this guide, it's not enough simply to analyze deals. At some point, you will need to take the plunge
and buy your first property. This chapter is going to focus on the best ways to find the best properties,
negotiate the best deal, and make sure you get through closing in one piece.

In This Chapter You'll Learn:
 How to Profit When You Buy
 Your Home Shopping Criteria
 Where to Find Real Estate Investments
 The Buying Process

How to Profit When You Buy Your Investment Property
As the popular real estate quote at the start of this chapter states, you "make your profit when you buy." In
most cases, you will not start your investing career by landing a big fat check; these checks come after you
successfully implement your investment strategies. The profits you make, however, can be made or
destroyed at the time of purchase . . . So what does it mean to "profit when you buy?"
To make your profit when you buy, you must purchase a property at a price that ensures you make your
desired profits based upon your ability to execute your exit strategy. In other words, you need to buy
47 | How to Find Investment Properties

smart. If you vastly overpay for a property, no amount of wishing, hoping, or improvement is going to make
your investment worthwhile.
While you can't predict with 100% accuracy where the market is going to go, you can know where it's at
today.

Real World Example:
28 Cherry Street is currently listed at $145,000, and recent
comparable sales show that the similar homes have sold for
between $140,000 and $170,000. 28 Cherry Street, however,
needs about $25,000 worth of work to be in nice condition.
Therefore, if you pay $145,000 for it and put in $25,000, you'll
be at $170,000, and that doesn't count all the closing costs,
holding costs, selling costs, unforeseen overages, or other fees
that you'll have to pay. You will be underwater (owe more than
it's worth) on this property no matter how much work you do
to it. However, if similar homes were valued at $225,000, you
would find that you had, indeed, made your profit when you
bought.
The same principle applies to rental investment properties. If
all your monthly expenses (including taxes and insurance) on
28 Cherry Street were $1200 per month and the average rent received each month was $1100 per month,
you would be losing money each month. However, if average rents were $2,000 per month and your total
expenses were just $1100, you would be profitable from the day you bought it.
It's often said by experienced investors that appreciation is the "icing on the cake." In other words, don't
count on the market swinging upward. You make your profit when when you purchase a property based on
what it would be worth today, not what it might be worth someday. If an investment makes no sense without
appreciation, don't invest in it. This is known as "speculating," and, while it may be profitable for some, is a
risky venture for both inexperienced and experienced investor alike.
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 046: Six Figure Profit Spec Building and Marketing for Incredible Deals with Jon Klaus

Your Investment Property Shopping Criteria
Now that you understand why getting a great deal is important (to lock in your profits at the beginning), it's
time to start looking for a property. Before you do, you need to define your selection criteria. This section will
focus on what your criteria is, why it matters, and how to define it.
Imagine that you want to use a new recipe in making your dinner tonight. You take out a cookbook to find a
recipe that looks good, discover a great baked chicken meal, and make your shopping list of ingredients in
order to make the meal for your family. You head to the store and begin picking up the items on your list.
48 | How to Find Investment Properties

Chicken, basil, olive oil, and other items begin to fill your cart. Suddenly, you see the spaghetti and
remember another recipe that you once wanted to try with spaghetti. You begin to reach for the spaghetti,
but then remember your shopping list. Spaghetti isn't on the list for tonight's dinner, so you put back the
distraction and continue on your way home to make a perfect dinner for your family.
Real estate is no different. Your selection criteria list is just like your
ingredient list in the example above. It is designed to keep you focused on
shopping for the things you need and not waste money on other good
looking things along the way. Real estate is an exciting field with a lot of
different niches and strategies, so it is easy to get distracted by the next big
thing or trend. Having a clearly defined selection criteria can help you stay
focused, avoid "analysis paralysis," and keep you on track to buy a great
investment property. By defining your criteria, you will be able to narrow
down the choices in the market, and you will then eliminate the vast majority
of deals that are only distractions. Instead, you'll focus on finding just the
kind of deals that you are interested in buying.

Creating Your Selection Criteria
In chapter 3, we looked at a number of different niches you could invest in, as well as multiple strategies you
can use to invest. It's now time to choose the niche and strategy and come up with a list of criteria to narrow
down your selection further.
There are a number of different items you will want to consider to add to your "criteria list." These could
include:
 Town
 Neighborhood
 Property Size (Square Ft)
 Lot Size
 Property Conditions
 Number of Units
 Cap Rate
 Cash Flow
 Appreciation Potential

No one can tell you exactly what your investment property criteria should or should not include. Some of it
will come down to personal preference, such as, "I only want to buy in Seattle" or "I only want houses with
basements," but most of your chosen criteria will revolve around the kind of investment you are getting into.
49 | How to Find Investment Properties

For example, if you are looking to become a "buy and hold" investor of small multifamily units, your criteria
is going to include small multifamily properties and will exclude old commercial buildings.
By specifying ahead of time what criteria you are willing to look at, your search becomes much more
manageable. In the same way, you are able to more effectively communicate your desires to others who may
help you buy property. If you simply told people, "I am looking for real estate," the most likely response
would be, "Good for you..." However, if you instead mentioned that you were looking to buy a small single
family house in the Rockford neighborhood for under $150,000, you enable others to think of properties that
might match that description and get you connected with the deal.

Understanding "The Rules" of Investment Property
Perhaps the most important part of the criteria you put together is the financial component. If a deal doesn't
make sense financially, it's not going to be a strong investment for you. In chapter 2, we looked at some of
the basic math surrounding real estate investing, such as income, cash flow, and return on investment.
However, generally speaking, a listing is not going to tell you the important information you want to know
about the financials of a property. Yes, you can generally determine the amount of income the property
makes, but you won't know immediately how much monthly cash flow the property produces, how
overpriced the property is, or what you should offer. Additionally, it's not going to make sense to get out your
spreadsheet and do a full property evaluation on every single deal you glance at. This is when "rules" come
into play.
A "rule" is short for "rule of thumb." Rules can help give you a quick way to evaluate a property's financials
on the fly. As with any "rule of thumb," using rules is not an exact science and should never be relied on
entirely to decide if a property is a good investment. However, they can help you quickly filter a property and
decide if it's worth further evaluation. Let's take a look at a few of these rules:

The 2% rule states that your monthly rent should be approximately 2% of the purchase price. In
other words, a $100,000 home should rent for $2,000 per month; a $50,000 home should rent for
$1,000 per month. This is a very conservative estimate that is very simplistic, but can help in deciding
if a property warrants a deeper look. In most parts of the country, the 2% is very difficult to achieve,
but the closer you can get to that, the better cash flow you'll receive.
50 | How to Find Investment Properties

Real World Example: An average three bedroom home rents for $800 per month in your neighborhood.
According to the 2% rule - you should be looking to spend around $40,000 for that property ($800 / .02 =
$40,000)

The 50% rule is a great rule-of-thumb that helps you to fairly accurately predict how much your expenses are
going to cost you each month for a property. The 50% rule simply states that 50% of your income will be
spent on expenses -- not including the mortgage payment. As mentioned above, most real estate listings
will let you know what the monthly income of a property is. By dividing that number in half, you are able to
easily see how much you'll have left to pay the monthly mortgage (principal and interest). Any income left
over after the 50% of expenses and the mortgage payment are taken out is your cash flow. The 50% of
expenses includes all expenses, including repairs, vacancies, utilities, taxes, insurance, management,
turnover costs, and the occasional "big ticket" repairs that must be saved up for -- aka CapEx or Capital
Expenses, like roofs, parking lots, furnaces.

Real World Example: An apartment building brings in $8,000 per month in income. Using the 50% rule, we
are left with $4,000 to make the mortgage payment. If the monthly mortgage payment on the property was
$3,500 per month, you can reasonably assume a monthly cashflow of $500 per month.
The 50% rule is especially helpful in teaching that expenses are almost always more than one might think.
One common mistake that new investors make is underestimating how much the expenses are going to cost.
The 50% rule helps to show that there are always costs that are unexpected, so plan for them.

51 | How to Find Investment Properties

The 70% rule is used by investors to quickly determine the maximum price one should pay for a property
based on the after repair value (ARV). Though most often used by house flippers, the 70% rule can actually
be used for any strategy when you want to find a good deal. The 70% rule says that you should only pay
70% of what the after repair value is, less the repair costs.

Real World Example: A home which, after being fixed up, should sell for approximately $200,000, needs
approximately $35,000 worth of work. Using the 70% rule, a person should multiply $200,000 by 70% to get
$140,000 - and then subtract the $35,000 in repairs. The most a person should pay for this property,
therefore, should be $105,000.
Remember, a rule of thumb, like the ones above, is used only to quickly and efficiently screen a property and
decide if it's worth further investigation. Never use a "rule of thumb" to decide exactly how much to pay or if
you should invest or not. If a property passes the above rules (or gets close), it may be worth a more detailed
analysis on paper or via a computer spreadsheet. Don't confuse a rule of thumb for a license to skip doing
your homework.
NOTE: Check out the BiggerPockets 70% Rule Calculator to run 70% calculations on potential deals.
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 040: 40 Quick Tips for Buying Your First (or Next) Investment Property

Where to Find Real Estate Investments
When you have your criteria set, it's time to start looking for your
investment property. No doubt you've seen "For Sale" signs in front of
homes, but there are many other ways to find investment properties.
This section will explore various different ways that you can use to find
properties -- the list is not exhaustive, but a good start for any new
investor

52 | How to Find Investment Properties

The MLS
The MLS, short for the Multiple Listing Service, is a collection of properties for sale by different real estate
brokers across the country. When you search a site like Realtor.com or Redfin.com, you are actually
searching the MLS. This information is widely distributed for the most eyes to see.

The Newspaper
While quickly fading from use, the classified section of your local
newspaper is a good place to look for homes that are "For Sale by
Owner." Oftentimes, real estate agents will also put their listings in
the newspaper, so it can be a bit challenging to determine what is
listed on the MLS and what is not.

Word of Mouth
Some homes are simply sold the old fashion way - by word of mouth.
By letting everyone know that you are in the market to buy (and
defining your criteria, as discussed above), you place yourself in the
best position to find deals via word of mouth. You can do this directly
with peers, at your local real estate club, or in the BiggerPockets Marketplace.

Craigslist
Craigslist.org is a free online classifieds website that is currently the #51 most popular website in the world.
Millions of people use Craigslist.org to buy, sell, trade, or give away almost anything you can imagine -including real estate.

Outbound Marketing
Outbound marketing is when you go out and bring sellers to you. This can involve advertising, direct mail, or
a number of other marketing techniques. Marketing is such an important topic that we have dedicated an
entire chapter, chapter 7, to it.

Loopnet.com
Loopnet.com is the web's largest marketplace for commercial properties. From small multifamily properties
to apartment complexes, shopping malls, fast food restaurants, and more, Loopnet.com is the place to
search for publicly listed commercial properties for sale.

The Property Buying Process
When you buy a property, you don't simply write a check to the seller and get the keys. The process of buying
and selling real estate is a complex and often lengthy venture that has many moving parts. This section is
going to walk you through the steps, from beginning to end.
53 | How to Find Investment Properties

Step One: You decide on your investment strategy/niche (see chapter 3 .)

Step Two: You define your selection criteria (see earlier in this chapter.)

Step Three: You decide upon the method of financing the deal. This means you will have a clear plan of
how you are going to purchase the property. If you are planning on using a bank loan, you will want to be
"pre-approved." If you plan on, instead, using all cash, you will want to have that money liquid and ready to
be used (see chapter 6 ).

Step Four: You begin looking on the MLS, commercial search sites like Loopnet.com, the newspaper
classifieds, direct mail, yard signs, and all other avenues to find properties for sale. You probably will connect
with a real estate agent at this point, as they are generally "free" for the buyer (they are typically paid out of
the seller's closing costs). If you are dealing directly with homes that are not listed on the MLS, you probably
will not use a real estate agent but instead will just contact the sellers themselves.

Step Five: You run each property through a list of criteria "filters" to quickly screen out the duds. These
filters are based on the criteria you set as well as the rules we discussed earlier in this chapter.

54 | How to Find Investment Properties

Step Six: You make an offer on the property (or properties) that you want to pursue. You may offer less
than what you are actually willing to spend, or you may offer your bottom line. Typically, an offer is made
using a "Purchase and Sale Agreement," which your real estate agent will most likely do for you. If you are
not buying a property from the MLS and do not use an agent, you can usually get a fill-in-the-blank purchase
and sale agreement online at a paper supply store, from an attorney, or free from a local Title and Escrow
company. We strongly recommend that any agreement you use be reviewed by your real estate attorney,
however.

Step Seven: You negotiate the deal with the seller and, if possible, come to a mutually accepted
agreement on price and terms. For a great article on negotiation, see Seven Tips for Better Negotiations.

Step Eight: You perform your "due diligence," which includes any inspections of the property. The
property details are then handed over to either a Title or Escrow company or a local attorney (depending on
your state). During this time, you will also submit needed paperwork for your financing,begin lining up
contractors (if work is needed), check on the validity of the financials given about the property, and prepare
for closing in handling whatever other issues come up. This process can take anywhere from several days to
several months or more, depending on the situation. Bank financing is generally the reason this process
takes longer, so if you are using all cash, closings can be much quicker.

55 | How to Find Investment Properties

Step Nine: You sign papers at the Title and Escrow or attorney's office. Later that day (or within several
days, depending on your location), the paperwork will be recorded, and you'll be the new owner.
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 038: Unique Strategies for Buying Real Estate with Travis Daggett

Moving On
By the end of this chapter, you should understand the importance of having a clearly defined set of criteria
before starting your investment shopping, and these criteria should include both personal and financial
requirements. This well-defined criteria list will help narrow down your choices and help weed out the bad
properties, giving you the best chance for a solid profitable investment that best meets your needs. You
should also have a clear basic understanding of how the buying process works, from the first thought to
getting keys in hand.
In the next chapter, we are going to dive deeper into the world of real estate financing and look at 12
different methods you can use to finance your next investment.

56 | How to Find Investment Properties

"A bank is a place that will lend you money if you can prove that
you don't need it."
Bob Hope
No matter what some late night infomercial might lead you to believe, there is no such thing as "free" real
estate. Real estate is a commodity and must be paid for. As a real estate investor, one of the most important
roles you will play is to put together your deals using a variety of different financing tools. This chapter is
going to teach you the ins and outs of various methods you can use to fund your real estate investments.

In This Chapter, You'll Learn About:
 Why You Need to Understand Real

Estate Financing

 All Cash

 Hard Money

 Conventional Mortgages

 Private Money

 Portfolio Lenders

 Home Equity Loans and Lines of

 FHA Loans
 203K Loans
 Owner Financing

57 | Real Estate Financing

Credit

 Partnerships
 Commercial Loans
 Other investment Tools

Why You Need to Understand Real Estate Financing
The purpose of this chapter is to fill you in on the many different types
on real estate financing that you can use in your real estate investing.
In chapter 3, we looked at the different investment vehicles you can
take to invest in real estate (such as single family homes, commercial
real estate, apartments, and more), as well as some of the different
strategies (buy and hold, flipping, and wholesaling) you can use to
make money in real estate.
This chapter is designed to help you turn those strategies into reality.
If you have any questions about any of these real estate financing
techniques, don't hesitate to search the BiggerPockets website for
more information.
Finally, the following list is by no means comprehensive, but will give you a good idea of some of the
financing methods used by real estate investors to finance their real estate. By having a good broad overview
of these methods, you can combine an investment vehicle, an investment strategy, and a financing method
to handle any real estate investment.

All Cash
Many investors choose to pay all cash for an investment property.
According to a recent joint study by BiggerPockets and Memphis
Invest, 24% of US investors use 100% of their own cash to finance
their real estate investments. To be clear: even when investors use
terms like “All Cash,” the truth is, no “cash” is actually traded. In
most cases, the buyer brings a check (usually certified funds, such
as a bank cashier’s check) to the title company, and the title
company will write a check to the seller. Other times, the money is
sent via a wire transfer from the bank. This is the easiest form of
financing, as there are typically no complications, but for most
investors (and probably VAST majority of new investors), all cash is
not an option. Additionally, the return given from an all cash deal will not be the same as when leveraged.
Let’s explore this further via an example:
Real Life Example:

John has $100,000 to invest. He can choose to use that $100,000 to buy a house that will produce $1,000 per
month in income or $12,000 per year. This equates to a 12% return-on-investment.
John could also instead use that $100,000 as a 20% down payment on FIVE similar homes, each listed at
$100,000. With an $80,000 mortgage on each, the cash flow would be approximately $300 each month per
house, which is $1,500 per month each or $18,000 per year. This equates to a 18% return-on-investment 50% better than buying just one home.

58 | Real Estate Financing

Conventional Mortgage
As you can see from the example above, financing your investment
property can produce significantly better returns than paying all cash. Most
investors, instead, choose to finance their investments with a cash down
payment
and
a
traditional
conventional
mortgage.
Most
traditional conventional mortgages require a minimum of 20% down, but
may extend higher to 25-30% for investment properties depending on the
lender. Conventional mortgages are the most common type of mortgage
used by home buyers and generally provide the lowest interest rates. Click
here to find interest rates in your area.
To learn more about mortgage financing and what you can qualify for,
check out the BiggerPockets Mortgage Center.

Portfolio Lenders
Conventional mortgage loans can originate from a variety of sources, such as
banks, mortgage brokers, and credit unions. In most cases, these lending sources
are not actually using their own capital to fund the loan, but are acquiring or
borrowing the funds from another party or reselling the loan to governmentbacked institutions, like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, in order to replenish their
own funds. As a result, most lending institutions must adhere to a very strict set
of rules and guidelines when it comes time to financing an investment. These
strict rules can make conventional financing difficult to obtain for many,
especially for real estate investors and other self employed borrowers.
However, some banks and credit unions have the ability to lend from their own
funds entirely, which makes them a portfolio lender. Because the money is their
own, they are able to provide more flexible loan terms and qualifying standards. This means that they are
able to make loans available at any terms acceptable to them. Oftentimes a portfolio lender will have funds
available with less restrictive qualifications than a conventional lender.
Most banks or lending institutions don't advertise that they are a portfolio lender, but you can find these
individuals through referrals and networking with other investors. You can also simply grab a phone book,
call each one, and ask if they offer portfolio lending.

FHA Loans
The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) is a United States
government program that insures mortgages for banks. If you have
health insurance or car insurance, you already understand the
concept: pooling money to spread the risk for everyone. FHA
loans are designed only for homeowners who are going to live in the
property, so you cannot use an FHA-backed loan to buy a pure
investment property. However, you can take advantage of the
exception to the rule that allows the FHA-financed home to have up
59 | Real Estate Financing

to four separate units. In other words, if you plan to live in one of the units, you could buy a duplex, triplex,
or four-plex.
The benefit of the FHA loan is the low-down payment requirement: currently just 3.5%. This can help get you
started much sooner, since you don't need to save up 20%. However, every blessing comes with a curse.
While the low down payments the FHA offers are great, the FHA does require an additional payment, called
"Private Mortgage Insurance." This "PMI" insurance protects the lender and is required when the down
payment on an FHA loan is less than 20%. The extra PMI payment can make your monthly payment slightly
higher, thus reducing your cash flow.
To read more about using an FHA Loan to get started investing, check out New Investor Strategy: How to Buy
Your First Multi-Family Investment Property & Live Rent Free

203K Loans
A sub-set of the FHA loan, the 203K loan is a loan that allows a
homeowner to purchase a house that is in need of some rehab work
and gives them the ability to finance those repairs or improvements
into the loan itself. Like the normal FHA loan, the 203K loan still allows
for the low down payment requirement allowed by the FHA (currently
just 3.5%). This loan type is also applicable for duplexes, triplexes, and
fourplexes, but maintains the same requirement for only being for
"owner occupants" and comes with Private Mortgage Insurance
demands for loans under 20%.

Real World Example:

John found a small duplex for $100,000 that he wants to move into, with plans to live in one half and rent the
other half out. The property is in need of about $12,000 for new paint and carpet. John is able to include that
$12,000 into the cost of the loan and pay just a 3.5% down payment on the total amount for a total of $3,920
down. John can now get the new paint and carpet (paid for by the loan), move into his renovated home, rent
out the other half, and begin making cash flow and building wealth. John is a happy camper.

HomePath Mortgages
Another government backed loan, the HomePath Mortgage was
introduced by the government-owned mortgage giant Fannie
Mae in an attempt to help turn their non-performing loans
(properties they have foreclosed on) into profitable loans again. Like the FHA loan, the HomePath program
allows for smaller down payments (currently as low as 10%), but unlike the FHA, no mortgage insurance is
required, and the loan is available for investors and "non-owner occupied properties." The HomePath
program also includes the ability to finance repairs into the purchase like the 203K FHA loan we talked about
60 | Real Estate Financing

earlier. The catch, however, is that these loans are only available on Bank Repos owned by Fannie Mae. To
search for homes available for the HomePath program, visit the HomePath website at HomePath.com.

Owner Financing
Banks or other giant lending institutions are not the only entities that
can finance a property for you. In some cases, the owner of the
property you want to buy, can actually fund the property, and you will
simply make your monthly payment to them rather than a bank.
Typically, the only time a property owner will do this for you is if they
already own the home free-and-clear, meaning the seller cannot have
an existing mortgage on the property. If the seller does have another
loan and then sells the home to you, the seller's loan must be paid back
immediately or face foreclosure.
This is due to a legal clause written into nearly every loan called the
"Due on Sale" clause. This clause gives the former lender the right to
call the note immediately due. If that amount can't be paid, the lender has the right to foreclose on the
property. Some investors choose to ignore this clause and still purchase "subject to" the other loan, risking
that the bank won't foreclose.
If the conditions are right, owner financing can be a great way to gain ownership of real estate without using
a bank. Owner financing can also be a good tool for selling your properties in the future as well, which we'll
cover more in chapter 8 when we look at "exit strategies."

Hard Money
“Hard money” is financing that is obtained from private business or individual for the purpose of investing in
real estate. While terms and styles change often, Hard Money has several defining characteristics:
 Loan is primarily based on the value of the property
 Shorter term lengths (due in 6 – 36 months)
 Higher than normal interest (8-15%)
 High loan “points” (fees to get the loan)
 Many hard money lenders do not require income verification
 Many hard money lenders don't require credit references
 Does not show on your personal credit report
 Hard money can often fund a deal in just days
 Hard money lenders understand when the property needs rehab work

61 | Real Estate Financing

Hard money can be beneficial for short term loans and situations, but many investors who have used hard
money lenders have been placed in tough situations when the short term loan ran out. Use hard money with
caution, making sure you have multiple exit strategies in place before taking out a hard money loan.
To find a hard money lender, try the following tips:
 Ask a Real Estate Agent

 Newspaper

 Ask a House Flipper

 Craigslist

 Check out BiggerPockets' Hard Money

 Google It

List

 Mortgage Broker

Private Money
Private money is similar to hard money in many respects, but is usually
distinguishable due to the relationship between the lender and the borrower.
Typically, with "private money," the lender is not a professional lender like a
hard money lender, but rather an individual looking to achieve higher returns
on their cash. Oftentimes, there is a close relationship with a private money
lender ahead of time, and these lenders are often much less “business”
oriented than hard money lenders. Additionally, private money usually has
fewer fees and points, and the term length can be negotiated more easily to
serve the best interest of both parties.
Private lenders will lend you cash to buy property in exchange for a specific interest rate. Their investment is
secured by a promissory note or mortgage on the property which means if you don't pay, they can foreclose
and take the house (just like a bank, hard money, or most other loan types). The interest rate given to a
private lender is usually established up front and the money is lent for a specified period of time, anywhere
from six months to thirty years.
A private lender typically does not receive any equity stake in cash flow future value outside of their predetermined interest rate, but there are no hard-and-fast rules when it comes to private capital. Generally,
private money is financed by one investor. These loans are also commonly used when you believe you can
raise the value of the property over a short period of time, so you can take on the debt from that private
money, refinance the property after adding value, and pay back the private lender. Just like with hard money,
private money should only be used when you have multiple, clearly defined exit strategies.
If you are trying to build relationships for private capital, developing credibility is a MUST. Whether it’s
through blogging about your real estate endeavors online, posting your real estate updates on Facebook,
talking about real estate investing in casual conversation, or attending your local real estate investment club,
you need to be visible. Are you maximizing your visibility? Are you creating opportunities to highlight your
investing experience to others? You don't need to be a braggart, but next time someone asks what’s new in
your life, share a few details of your real estate endeavors. You never know what might transpire.

62 | Real Estate Financing

Home Equity Loans and Lines of Credit
Many investors choose to tap into the equity in their own primary home to help
finance the purchase of their investment properties. Banks and other lending
institutions have many different products, such as a Home Equity Installment
Loan (HEIL) or a Home Equity Line of Credit (HELOC) that allow you to tap into
the equity you've already got. For example, an investor may purchase a
property, but instead of going through the normal hassle of trying to finance the
investment property itself, they can instead take out a HELOC on their own
home to pay for the property.
In order to obtain a home equity loan or line of credit, you must first have equity in your home. Banks will
typically only lend up to a certain percentage of your home's value in total. This percentage differs between
lenders, but it is not uncommon to find a lending institution that will offer to lend up to 90% of the value of
your home.
Real World Example:

John's current home is worth $100,000. John visits with his local bank and learns that they will allow up to
90% debt on that home. Therefore, John can borrow a total of $90,000 on the house. If he already owes
$50,000 on a first mortgage, the home equity line or loan would be capped at $40,000 to ensure the total
loans didn't exceed 90%.

Using home equity loans and lines of credit have multiple benefits over traditional loans, including:
 Loan is based on the value of your primary residence - not the newly purchased property.
This means that the bank that is providing the loan won't typically even look at the new
property. They don't generally concern themselves with what your intent is with the money,
only your ability to pay it back. As such, the new property can be in terrible condition, and
the bank likely won't care.
 When you have a home equity loan or line, the money is yours to do with what you want. It's
not dependent on the new property - so you can offer "cash" when making offers on new
properties, and as a result, you will have a higher chance of getting your offers accepted.
 Home equity lines and loans may have certain tax benefits, such as the ability to deduct the
interest paid on that loan, allowed by the IRS. See a qualified CPA or attorney for more
information on this.
 Because the loan is secured by your primary residence, the interest rate on home equity
loans and lines is typically very low compared to hard money or private money. To learn
more about what current rates are on these products, visit the BiggerPockets Mortgage
Center.

63 | Real Estate Financing

Another strategy often used by investors is to use a small bit of their home equity to fund the down payment
on their investment property.
Real World Example:

Sarah, an investor, wants to buy an investment property for $100,000, but doesn't have any additional down
payment. She does, however, have a lot of available equity in her own primary house (she owes $50,000, but
the home is worth $100,000). Sarah opens up a $20,000 home equity loan on her personal home to fund the
down payment and then get a conventional mortgage from a bank for the remaining $80,000 on the
investment property.
Finally, home equity loans and lines come with both fixed and adjustable interest rates. Be sure to look at
your goals, timetables, and financial position when determining which home equity product you want to use
to further your investing career.

Partnerships
We touched briefly on the use of "partners" in chapter 4, but another
part of that discussion that we didn't cover is their ability to help you
finance a deal. If you want to invest in a piece of property, but the price
range is outside of your pocketbook, an equity partner might be a
welcome addition to your team. An equity partner is someone that you
bring into a transaction in order to help finance the property.
Partnerships can be structured in many different ways, from using a
partner’s cash to finance the entire property, to using a partner to
simply fund the down payment. There are no set “rules” with equity
partnerships, but each situation and deal requires its own analysis of
how the deal will be put together, who makes the decisions, and how
profits will be split at the end.
Depending on the operating agreement signed by both parties, the equity partner may have an active or
passive role in the property. The ownership stake provided by the equity partner may allow that partner to
actively participate in nearly all aspects of property ownership. Additionally, as a partner, they typically
receive in accordance with their ownership percentage a return on their investment that includes cash flow,
appreciation, depreciation, and eventual profit when the property is sold.
Unlike a private lender, an equity partner does not receive an agreed upon interest rate on their money.
Instead, they receive only a percentage of what the property generates. If it makes a lot of money then, their
return will be higher, but if the investment loses money, they may have to contribute money to keep the
property afloat. Equity partners take a higher risk than a private lender might, but in return, they have the
potential of making significantly more when the investment is successful. Also, unlike in private lending, the
equity partner's investment is not secured by a mortgage or promissory note, but by an operating agreement
between the partners.

64 | Real Estate Financing

12.) Commercial Loans
While most of the above options focus
primarily on the residential side of loans, the
world of commercial lending may also be
viable option for your investing. In fact, if
you are looking to buy a property other than
a one to four unit residential property, a
commercial loan is probably exactly what
you'll be needing.
Commercial loans typically have slightly higher interest rates and fees, as well as shorter terms and different
qualifying standards. In the world of residential lending, the income of the borrower is valued above almost
every other area; commercial lending, however, is much more focused on the property instead. The logic
behind this is simple: if you own a ten million dollar apartment building and things go wrong, you aren't
going to be able to make that mortgage payment if you make $20,000 per year or $200,000 per year in
personal income. The commercial lender will still look at your income, credit, and other personal financial
indicators, but only to gain a picture as to your skills financially. What's more important in the vast majority
of cases is the amount of revenue a property generates.
Additionally, commercial lenders can often extend a “business line of credit” to finance flips or other
investments. Some investors are able to obtain a large "business line of credit," which allows them access to
cash for house flipping and other real estate ventures.

EIULS, Life Insurance, ROTH IRAs, and Other Sources
There a multitude of other investment and savings products out there that you can use to invest in real
estate. While we don't have the time to cover each of these in detail, be sure to speak to a qualified financial
advisor about ways that you can use these products in your investing career.
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 013 – Buying Real Estate with Seller Financing and Speculating with Leon Yang

Moving On
As you can see, there are many different ways you can finance an investment property. One of the most
valuable roles you play as an investor is in your ability to find creative ways to continually move forward with
your investments. As every deal is different from one another, you will find yourself using many different
financing strategies throughout your career, so being able to understand the different options will help you
throughout your entire investing journey.
Another valuable and equally important role you will be playing as an investor is the role of marketing
professional. Chapter 7 will look at the concept of real estate marketing in detail and will give you ideas and
strategies to use to supercharge your investment opportunities. Marketing is important not only for buying
properties, but also for selling and renting.
65 | Real Estate Financing

"Marketing takes a day to learn. Unfortunately, it takes a lifetime
to master."
Philip Kotler
No matter what aspect of real estate investing you choose to engage in, you will probably need to use
marketing in some fashion. Marketing is the process of reaching outside your normal sphere of influence to
propel your business forward. Where you take your business is entirely dependent on you and your
marketing skills.

In this chapter, you'll learn:
 Your Greatest Marketing Tool: Yourself
 Marketing Through Networking
 Networking in the Online World
 Your Marketing Funnel
 Marketing Through Direct Mail

66 | Real Estate Marketing

Your Greatest Real Estate Marketing Tool: Yourself
As a real estate investor, the first and most important thing you'll be
marketing is yourself - your own personal brand. It doesn't take a lot of
money, and it doesn't take a lot of time. You will begin building a brand
around yourself the moment that you begin talking to others about real
estate. You never know where these conversations are going to lead you,
so guard your brand fiercely. Let's look a little deeper at how to
effectively market your own personal brand.

Be Honest
As a new investor, you are not going to know everything and that's 100% okay. One of the quickest ways to
tarnish your reputation is when you start speaking about things that you don't actually know much about.
When you try to come off as an "expert" and you're not one, other real investors will know immediately and
will not waste any time dealing with you. Admit what you don't know and use that to learn. In fact, one of the
best ways to grow as an entrepreneur is to ask a lot of questions and, in humility, listen to those who are
willing to teach.
Also, don't misrepresent yourself. We often see new investors do this here on BiggerPockets and elsewhere
online. What you'll sometimes see is a new investor coming on the scene and introducing themselves as
such. Then, in just a few days (sometimes less), they talk about having "properties in all 50 states" that they
are willing to sell on discount. Unless that person suddenly inherited dozens of properties overnight, that
person is likely misrepresenting themselves. In most cases, that person is merely a wholesaler following the
advice of a guru somewhere and trying to build a buyers list for their future deals. Yes, building a buyers list
is incredibly important. Doing so under false pretenses, however, is the surest way to never make a deal.
You'll also find new investors marketing deals via Craigslist or other sites, but these are deals that they have
no interest in. Like in the previous example, these people are lying about deals to get other investors who
might be interested in them. If you get busted lying about a deal, you can rest assured that you'll never do
business with those folks who discover it.

Integrity
Do you do what you say you will do? Your integrity is the thing that will keep people coming back to work
with you, time and time again. As an investor, your reputation will precede you wherever you go. This means
that you need to continually be sure you are acting with the highest level of integrity. Imagine a lender who
promises to lend, but then backs out at the last second. Would they continue to grow their business? How
about a real estate agent who undercuts his clients and swoops in on all the good deals under his client's
feet? Would he continue to grow his brand? Your integrity is an integral part of your brand and can easily be
tarnished. Maintain the highest standards of integrity, and the business will find you.

67 | Real Estate Marketing

“The Importance of your integrity and reputation cannot be
overstated… you can work to build your reputation for years and
years but it only takes one falter to destroy all which was built”
James Vermillion, Investor
Professionalism
Are you planning on running a hobby or a business? If you want to be seen as a business professional, you
can start right now. Every decision you make, every relationship you build, and every item you buy: be
professional. You don't need to be a million dollar business to look like one. Showing up to a house with a
dirty hawaiian shirt and shorts probably isn't going to give you the professional image you want to succeed.
The same goes for the business cards you order, the voicemail on your phone, and the appearance of your
vehicle. People trust professionals - so start acting like one.

Real Estate Marketing Through Networking
One of the most important marketing tactics you can start
implementing today is networking. Networking is simply the
process of getting to know others for the purpose of moving both
individuals forward. It doesn't need to a formal thing, but your
day-to-day interactions should be part of your networking
strategy. Networking is often thought of as happening at an
event, where dozens of people get together and mingle,
exchange cards and tell industry specific stories. While yes, this is
a form of networking (most often seen at industry-specific
conferences and meetings), networking is actually a lifestyle.
Some of the most noteworthy connections you'll make will come
from impromptu conversations about your real estate investing.
I'm not suggesting that you simply walk up to strangers and start
telling them about your dreams and goals, but take advantage of talking about your business when the
opportunity presents itself. You'll be surprised at how many people are interested in real estate and how
often one quick mention of real estate leads to an entire conversation.
Not only is networking valuable for meeting people and businesses that can move your business forward, but
it's also effective for building your real estate team (which we covered extensively in chapter 4). No person
can succeed entirely on their own, so finding the best people to work with is one of the important tasks you
can do at the start.
Speaking of important, one of the most important places you can start networking is your local real estate
investing club. Located in nearly every major city, people gather at these clubs on a regular basis to discuss
current market trends and investing strategies, to swap tenant horror stories, and to make connections.
Many of the most important people on your team will probably come from your local investment club. Real
68 | Real Estate Marketing

estate investment clubs can differ dramatically in size and quality, so if there are multiple clubs in your city,
be sure to check them all out. For a list of local real estate investment clubs, see the BiggerPockets Real
Estate Clubs page.
Do keep in mind that many of these clubs are also designed to be profit centers for their owners. So, you
may need to endure sales pitches from gurus and other salespeople. That said, there is nothing more
important than connecting with your local peers, and these clubs are a great place to find them.
There are other networking events that are great for meeting your peers, including landlord association
meetings, meetups, and small live events organized by your peers here on BiggerPockets.
A final note on networking: get yourself some professional business cards. While many aspects of "old time"
marketing are fading away, the business card remains a staple in the real estate industry. Be sure that your
business card contains the following information:
 Your Name
 Your Company Name
 Your Company Position Title
 Your Website
 Your Phone Number
 Your Email Address
 Your Wants/Needs if Applicable (We Buy Houses)

Networking in the Online World
The world is changing more digital each day - and to be a top performer
in the real estate investing industry, you are going to need to change
also. Let's look at a few areas you can begin networking online:
 BiggerPockets.com- BiggerPockets is an online community

of real estate professionals that network with one
another every day, all day, to help each other learn, grow,
and prosper. Begin your networking here. It is important
to note that when networking with others, it is not about
"what can I get out of it," but rather "how can I contribute
to the conversation?"

 Hang out on our forums, asking questions when needed, and answering others when you

can. Comment on blog posts, send colleague requests, follow popular users, and engage
whenever possible. Networking on BiggerPockets is the same as networking in the real
world - it's not a one-time thing. Seek to become a familiar (and friendly) face on the site.
This means to be sure you have a picture uploaded to your profile and that your profile is

69 | Real Estate Marketing

fully filled out. Would you want to network with someone who had no face to identify with
and whose story you did not know? Never. Relationships are built with trust, and trust is
built through transparency. For more info on getting involved and for links to helpful
tutorials, check out our Start Here page.
 Your Website -- Having a website is a sign of professionalism in the industry - a sort of "store

front" to your business. That storefront needs to look inviting, professional, and clean in
order to attract people. In today's tech-friendly world, a great website is not hard or
expensive to build, even if you are terrible at technology.

 Social Media -- Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, and dozens of other social networks are

out there and are ripe for networking. You don't need to have a presence on every single
network, but focusing on one or two is better than being non-existent on all of them. The
trick to networking via social media, however, is to not use it as an advertising platform.
Social media is about creating relationships, so spend your time building solid relationships,
and make a name for yourself as someone with knowledge.

 Blogging -- A blog is simply an online collection of articles, ordered from newest to oldest. A

blog can help you establish credibility in your investing field, and can also be a great tool for
sorting out your thoughts on paper (well, on the screen) and hashing out ideas.
Furthermore, blogging can be a fun way to give back to the community. If you are interested
in hosting your own real estate blog, you can sign up for a free blog right on BiggerPockets.

Your Marketing Funnel
Marketing funnels are designed to transition a person from having no knowledge about your company to the
point where they are ready to engage in a business relationship with you. People use marketing funnels in
nearly every form of business, and real estate investing is no different.
You are probably familiar with a "funnel," often used for pouring
large amounts of liquid into a small space, such as when putting
oil in a vehicle. At the top, the funnel is at its widest, collecting
the most amount of whatever substance you are capturing. As
the substance moves down the funnel, it gets smaller and smaller
until it comes out the bottom into whatever container you are
pouring it into. In the same way, your marketing funnel will seek
to bring in the most amount of people at the top, and through
progressive steps, your funnel will get more specific until you
have a much smaller number of people left to produce your
desired goal.
The kind of marketing funnel you set will depend greatly on the
kind of investing you get into. A marketing funnel for a
wholesaler is going to be significantly different than that of a
note buyer, but perhaps with similar themes. For example, a
wholesalers funnel may look a lot like this:
70 | Real Estate Marketing

 Send out postcards to individuals who are past due on their mortgage.
 Set up a 1-800 voicemail number for people to call for foreclosure help.
 Allow people to leave a voicemail if they want more information about selling their

property.

 Call individuals who left a message and screen for possible good leads.
 Meet with the good leads and make offers.
 Get offers accepted and sign a purchase and sale agreement.
 Do due diligence.
 Close on the property.
Notice that in each step, the funnel narrows. At the start, perhaps five thousand people receive mailers. Out
of them, perhaps only a hundred people make the phone call to the number on your postcards. Out of that
hundred, only twenty leave a voicemail, of which only four warrant a personal visit and an offer. Finally,
perhaps one or two of those offers may actually result in a signed deal for the wholesaler.
While it may seem like a drastic waste, that one or two deals may result in a huge financial windfall for the
wholesaler. This is merely one example of a functional marketing funnel. As mentioned above, your
marketing funnel may differ quite a bit from the above funnel.
As a real estate investor, you need to be constantly measuring and tweaking your marketing funnel. You can
and should test your funnel to continually increase conversions -- the percentage of people who make it all
the way through the funnel to your desired outcome.
For example (to draw from the wholesale funnel example above), you could get two separate phone
numbers, split the group of past-due homeowners in half, sending half the postcards to one group and half
to the other and measure the results. Do you get more calls from postcard A or B? If postcard A received
twice as many calls, then use that as your "baseline" and test again with another postcard C. As you can see,
your marketing funnel can continually be tweaked, tested, and measured to make it run like a well-oiled
machine.

Marketing Through Direct Mail
What is Direct Mail?
While we are on the topic of postcards and mailing letters, let's
discuss that in more depth. This form of marketing is known as
"direct mail." Direct mail is simply the process of sending letters to
targeted individuals through the mail, in hopes that a small
percentage will respond to those letters. Whether you are a
wholesaler, flipper, or buy and hold investor, your business is
dependent upon finding great deals and having a consistent supply of leads for those deals. Direct mail can
71 | Real Estate Marketing

be a great tool for building a steady supply of leads for your business and can be a great way to keep your
funnel full. For many investors, it is their number one source of leads.

How Does Direct Mail Work?
Direct mail campaigns are designed to build awareness of your product or service over time. Think back to
one of the last purchases you made, such as a drink at Starbucks, a movie you rented, or a song you
purchased from iTunes. Chances are, you didn't buy that item the first time you heard about it. Most folks
simply don’t buy from a business the first time they come across it. Therefore, a direct mail campaign cannot
be a simple "one and done" campaign. By sending messages over the course of time, the recipients become
familiar with you and your service or product, and some will respond as you become the solution to their
needs.

How Do I Build a List to Send to?
You can build your list by using public records provided by your local county assessor, or you can hire an
online company, like Listsource, to get your list for you. While using the pubic records is free, using an online
company may save you time, so keep your goals in mind as you begin creating your list. Do note that you
need to have your list re-done every six months or so to keep it fresh, as the market is continually changing.
You will need to get rid of those folks that are no longer candidates for your particular list, and you will want
to add in new people.

What Do I Send? There are two primary options that investors tend to mail to potential leads. Let's look
at these briefly:
 Postcards -- These can be either large or small, but the

benefit is that the recipient doesn't need to physically open
an envelope to read what's inside.

 Yellow Letters -- Written (or typed) on an actual yellow piece

of paper, these letters are typically mailed in an envelope.
The response rate is often very high, due to the "personal"
nature of the letter.

Who Should I Send Direct Mail to?
Both the frequency with which you mail and the length of the campaign will vary depending on the type of
marketing funnel you are setting up and the type of investing you are engaging in. Direct mail can be sent to
virtually anyone, so you'll need to look at your funnel and decide. The following is a list of a few different
types of people you may want to target:
 Absentee Owners. For those looking to get a great deal, those folks who are absentee

owners are great targets, particularly those who live out of town. In many cases, these
owners may have moved for work or another reason and may be looking to get rid of their
property.

 Abandoned Properties. People may abandon a property for a variety of reasons, but in most

cases, they don't care enough about the property to want to keep it and spend the money

72 | Real Estate Marketing

required to maintain it. Contacting owners of properties that look to be dilapidated or
abandoned may lead to fantastic opportunities.
 Probates. Probates are properties that are in the process of being distributed, along with

the assets of a deceased person, to their heirs. When investors talk about probate investing,
they are trying to find if a deceased person had property, then getting the heirs/executor to
sell that property to them at a discount.

 Pre-foreclosures and Foreclosures. People struggling with losing their home are oftentimes

highly motivated to sell (though, sometimes, they are highly anti-motivated and choose to
just stick their heads in the sand). You can oftentimes find a way to create a "win-win"
situation to help these individuals save their credit and snag a great deal for yourself.

 Apartment Owners. If you are looking to get into apartment buying, mailing to apartment

owners can be a great way to stay on their radar. Your mailings do not need to be
necessarily targeted toward distressed or motivated sellers, but can be geared toward
individuals who are willing to finance the property themselves using seller financing.

 Expired Listings. Your real estate agent will have access to all the properties on the MLS that

did not sell when listed with an agent. These individuals may be more willing to sell at a
discount after their property was listed for some time and didn't sell. Additionally, the
owners may also be motivated now that they no longer need to pay any real estate agent
fees.

Whatever niches you choose to work in, be sure to keep organized records of your campaigns, so you can
measure and test your results, maximizing your efforts.

Marketing Through Online Advertising
As more and more people spend their time online, you may be left
behind if you don't move your real estate marketing into that arena as
well. The internet provides numerous ways you can market your real
estate investing business, and, as with all marketing techniques, the
style of marketing you do depends greatly on the type of investing you
engage in. The following are several tools you can use to market on
the internet.

Facebook/Google Ads for Real Estate
Do you ever wonder how Facebook or Google make all their money? The majority of their revenue comes
from their online advertising platforms. As an investor, you can use these sources to target potential sellers,
buyers, or other business interactions. While Facebook and Google ads may look fairly similar, they differ in
several key ways:

73 | Real Estate Marketing

 Facebook allows you to target who sees your ad based on their interests, location,

demographics, and connections on Facebook.

 Google allows you to target who sees your ad based on their searches, web history, and

location.

The benefit of these kinds of online ads is that you can set it up so you only pay when the ad works.
Imagine asking a local newspaper to only charge you when someone calls about your ad. There's no chance
of that happening. However, this is exactly what this kind of online advertising allows you to do. This is
known as “pay-per-click” advertising, which means you only pay when someone clicks on an ad and goes to
your site. With pay-per-click advertising (such as ads on Facebook, Google, or Bing), you only have to pay for
the ad when your advertisement accomplished its goal of placing people in your marketing funnel.

Benefits of Online Pay-Per-Click Advertising
 Most online pay-per-click advertisements allow you to be

location specific – which means you can choose to have
your advertisement seen only by individuals within ten, a
hundred, or any number of miles of your specified location.

 Additionally, Facebook ads are interest-specific. (Do you

really believe Facebook’s “like” feature is only for the user's
benefit?) Facebook uses those “likes” and friendship
relationships to help marketers reach certain people. This
means, as a real estate marketer, you can choose to show
your ad only to people who are interested in a certain topic.

 Finally, most pay-per-click advertising (especially Facebook) is demographically-specific, so

you can advertise to specific ages or genders. For example, you can create a well-written
advertisement to attract first time homebuyers by choosing to advertise only to people
between the ages of twenty-two and thirty-two that live within ten miles of a property you
are attempting to sell.

How Online Ad Pricing Works:
“How much does it cost?” is a more difficult question than it may seem.
Pay-per-click marketing prices are based on an “auction,” meaning that advertisers “bid” on a price to display
their ad. Marketers then compete for either keywords or interests, based on the criteria you are targeting
your advertising to. When you set up a new ad, you will tell Facebook, Google or Bing what price per click you
want to pay, and you'll generally never be charged more than that. If you bid too low, your ad will not be
shown due to other marketers paying more. Thankfully, the major pay-per-click companies do provide a
general range of prices, so you can determine how much you'll need to spend to reach a specific
demographic. You also have the option to set a daily or monthly budget, so you can control how much you
want to spend on your marketing.
74 | Real Estate Marketing

Tips for Creating Online Ads:
 Where Will Your Ad Send People? This destination could be your own website, your business

Facebook page, or any site that you want. Just be sure this destination is part of your
marketing “funnel."

 Create a Title That Pops. You are allowed only a limited number of characters for your title –

so make them stand out. It is helpful when advertising to local potentials to use something
local in the title to make the ad stand out. Online viewers are not generally accustomed to
seeing local names and places on an online ad, so ads like that tend to pop.

 Intrigue Them with Your Ad's Body The part of the ad that is not the title is known as the

"body." Appealing to both fact and emotion when you write the copy for your ad's body can
help trigger interest in both sides of the brain and increase clicks. Promote benefits over
features.

 Use an Eye-Catching Photo. If using Facebook, the photograph is the most important section

of your ad because it is generally the only thing viewers pay much attention to at first. Catch
their eye with the photo, which leads them to the title, which leads to the body, which leads
to clicks. An advertisement, in itself, is a funnel as well.

 Determine Your Price. To avoid massive spending, be sure to set your budget. Decide what

your monthly or daily budget is and bid on your ad price. Monitor the results and adjust your
bid price higher if you are not spending your complete budget.

 Split Test. Split testing is the process of creating multiple ads, each with minor changes, to

determine the best response rate from someone looking at the ad. This is the same process
we mentioned earlier when talking about sending different direct mail postcards to
different groups.

Creating a Website or Landing Page
A website is not a necessity in order to capture leads, but can be highly beneficial. Some investors simply use
a telephone number to collect leads, but having a website provides another avenue to collect those potential
opportunities. If you don’t have the technical know-how to create a professional looking website, use a premade template from a site like Wix.com or simply hire a freelancer at a site such
like Odesk.com, eLance.com, or 99Designs.com to build the site for you. You can also create a Facebook
business page that accomplishes your goal, but having your marketing funnel on your own website does give
you more control.
For more information on marketing and creating a marketing funnel, see Using Facebook Advertising to
Supercharge Your Real Estate Marketing
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 012 : Wholesaling and Marketing with Sharon Vornholt

75 | Real Estate Marketing

•

BP Podcast 018 : Flipping, Marketing, and Wholesaling with Danny Johnson

•

BP Podcast 022 – Building a Marketing Machine, Spec Houses, Flipping & Wholesaling with Tucker Merrihew

•

BP Podcast 027: Fix and Flipping, Wholesaling, Marketing, and More with Jason and Katherine Grote

•

BP Podcast 046: Six Figure Profit Spec Building and Marketing for Incredible Deals with Jon Klaus

Moving On
As you can see, real estate marketing is not a simple process. Each of the categories mentioned above could
be expanded upon greatly, and an entire book could be written about each. We also did not cover every
option available, but those that we feel are most commonly used today. The important thing when just
beginning is to focus on one or two marketing strategies and to implement them carefully, while monitoring
the results. Once you find something that works, stick with it, and if you want to generate more leads, expand
it or move on to another marketing strategy. In the same way, not all marketing strategies are going to
produce effective results. This is why maintaining accurate records and continually testing your marketing
campaigns is key.
Up until this point, we have looked at how to choose your investment strategy and niche, how to plan for
your next investment, how to finance your property, and how to use marketing to make it all happen. In the
next chapter, we are going to look at the way you actually begin making serious money from your
investments: executing your exit strategy.

76 | Real Estate Marketing

"Start with the end in mind."
Steven Covey
Buying real estate is great, but no one gets into real estate because it's a
fun hobby. Investing in real estate is a means to an end: wealth building.
Over time, your property should gain serious equity and provide you with
substantial income from cash flow and hopefully, appreciation. Some
investors choose to hold on to their investments indefinitely. Some will
simply hold on to cash flowing properties until the day they die - with no
intention of getting rid of it. However, in your investing career, you will
most likely choose to get rid of one or more of your properties for
various reasons. Choosing the best strategy for exiting your real estate
investment is just as important as deciding which one to buy. This
chapter will give you a broad overview of the various exit strategies you
can use in your investment career.

This Chapter Includes:
 Traditional Selling With a Real Estate Agent
 Selling FSBO
 Selling With Seller Financing
 Using Lease Options
 1031-Exchanges: Avoiding Taxes On a Sale
 Your Next Steps
77 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

Traditional Selling With a Real Estate Agent
When listing your home with an agent, be
sure to interview several agents to find one
you are comfortable with and that you know
will get the house sold. In the world of real
estate agents, the "80/20 Principle" often
seems to hold true - that 20% of the agents
sell 80% of the listings. It's important to find
that 20% and allow them to work their magic.
When you choose the agent you want to list
your property, you will typically sign a "listing
agreement" with the agent, giving them the
right to earn the commission if they sell the
home. The agent will discuss with you all the
important features of the property and enter them into the "MLS" or Multiple Listing Service, which all agents
have access to. At this point, you will decide what price the property should be listed for. Pricing is very
important, as you do not want to list too high (adding months to your holding time) or too low (leaving
money on the table.) A good agent should be able to look at other similar properties and determine the best
price to list at.
The listing agreement also spells out the commission to be earned by the agent. The typical commission for a
real estate agent is 6% (though that can change slightly, depending on price, property type, and location.)
This fee is usually split 50/50 with the agent who brought the buyer. In the case where your selling agent is
representing both you and the buyer, the whole commission is given to the agent.
Many individuals feel that this is the end of their duty in selling the property, and the agent will take it from
here. However, this is not the case. There are many tricks and techniques that you, as the seller, can do to
ensure the property sells for the highest amount, the soonest. Start with making sure the appearance of the
property is desirable, including both the interior and exterior. Look around at competing properties, and aim
to look better than the rest.
If selling a single family home, consider staging the home with furniture, artwork, plants, flowers, and other
accessories to help the buyer imagine a home rather than simply an empty house. If selling a multifamily or
commercial property, be sure all units are filled and operating at peak efficiency.
Once an offer is received, negotiations begin, and hopefully both parties can agree on a price and terms for
the sale. Just as when you purchased the property, the paperwork for the sale of the property will be handled
by either a local "title and escrow" company or an attorney, depending on the common practices in your
area. Both parties will sign the documents, the money will be funneled through the title and escrow company
or attorney, and the deal will close, leaving you with a large check to invest in more real estate and grow your
empire.

Selling FSBO (For Sale By Owner)
While the majority of homes are sold with a real estate agent, you don't need to. Most often, a real estate
agent is going to cost you an extra 6% to sell your property for you. For this fee, an agent typical will:
78 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

 List the home on the MLS, which is accessed by all real estate agents across the country.
 Put the sign in the yard to advertise the home.
 Show your property to prospective buyers.
 Market to the best of their ability, including through

networking, Craigslist, and other online or offline media

 Manage negotiations with potential purchasers.
 Handle all the paperwork.

For some, the cost of a real estate agent is too high, so they choose instead to sell "For Sale by Owner," or
FSBO. A major deterrent in selling FSBO is not getting your property listed on the Multiple Listing Service, or
MLS. This list (or lists) is a collection of all the homes listed by all the real estate agents known as Realtors,
across the country. When you look for homes online through sites like Realtor.com, you are looking at the
MLS listings. Without being on the MLS, you'll lose the ability to reach the vast majority of individuals looking
for a property.
One recent tool used by some to sell is known as a Flat Fee MLS Listing service, in which a seller will pay a
"flat fee" to a real estate broker to list the house. This fee generally ranges between $150 - $400 and includes
very limited help from that broker. The broker will simply place the home on the MLS and might even offer a
sign in the yard, but will do very little other than this. This leaves negotiation, setting up title & escrow, and
managing the closing in the hands of the seller themselves. Additionally, since a real estate transaction
includes both the buyer's agent and the seller's agent, a commission is still paid to whatever agent brings a
buyer to the deal. Instead of 6%, it usually will end up being around 3% out of pocket.

Selling Using Seller Financing
Seller financing (also known as "carrying the contract") takes place when an
owner sells a property to a buyer but carries the mortgage rather than
requiring the buyer to get their own mortgage. This is done by many
investors all over the world for a variety of reasons and across different
investment types. In a normal sale, the buyer will go to a bank to get
financing for the house, and the seller will receive the total sale price (less
selling closing costs) in one lump sum. With seller financing, the seller is the
bank, so the buyer will provide a down payment directly to the seller and
make monthly mortgage payments to the seller for the life of the loan or
until the buyer decides to sell someday.

Why Use Seller Financing?
This is done for a number of reasons, but typically it is used for buyers who don't typically qualify for a
normal mortgage. The current lending atmosphere can make it tough for many buyers to obtain traditional
financing. They may not be able to document all of their income, they may be self employed, or may have
some blemishes on their credit reports.
79 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

Keep in mind that seller financing isn't only for the benefit of buyers who normally don't qualify for a
mortgage. Many investors choose to sell off their properties using seller financing because they want to
receive monthly income that doesn't involve maintenance, tenants, or rentals. When a property is sold via
seller financing, the property is 100% the new buyer's responsibility, and with that comes all the rights and
expenses that come with ownership (including taxes, insurance, and maintenance).
A seller may also choose to use seller financing in order to offset the taxes due at the end of their investment
career, as the IRS classifies this as an "installment sale" and allows the seller to spread out any capital gains
taxes that may be due. See your tax advisor for more information on the tax benefits of seller financing.

How to Use Seller Financing:
When offering seller financing, the seller should require a large non-refundable down payment up front to
protect their interest and to prevent against the the likelihood that the buyer will stop making their monthly
payments. The higher the down payment, the lower the risk to the seller. For example, if a seller requires a
$1,000 down payment, there is not a lot of incentive for the buyer to uphold their obligations. However, if the
down payment required is $30,000, there is a lot more incentive to perform. Additionally, it is important that
the seller goes through the same process as they would during a normal sale, using a title company,
attorneys, and other legal paperwork to ensure the sale is done correctly.

Who Can Sell With Seller Financing?
Seller financing is generally only applicable if the home is currently owned without a mortgage. If you have a
mortgage through a bank or other lending institution and decide to sell the property to another party using
seller financing, you will break the "due on sale clause" in the fine print of that mortgage, and the bank may
foreclose on you. Seller financing is only viable for a free and clear house.
After a property has been sold with seller financing, the seller may choose to sell the mortgage, or note, to
another investor. This opens up the world of "note buying," which is beyond the scope of this guide, but
which is a very common strategy amongst experienced investors. For more on notes, search BiggerPockets.

What Are Risks of Using Seller Financing?
The largest risk of selling with seller financing is having your buyer stop making payments at some point,
whereby you, the seller, will have to foreclose. In this case, you are subject to the same laws and foreclosure
process as any other lending institution, which takes time and money. Each state is different, but you will
probably need to hire an attorney to get through the process. After the foreclosure is complete, you will get
the house back and be able to sell it all over again, but you may have to deal with repairs and other issues
before the home is ready to be sold again.
While the risks of having to foreclose can’t be completely avoided, they can be minimized if the note is
managed properly. You do that by screening the buyer carefully, so that you are fully aware of any issues
that might arise. Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, the best way to reduce your risk is to get as high of a
down payment as possible. The more money you receive up front, the less likely you are to have problems.
Also be sure to check out:
•

BP Podcast 013 – Buying Real Estate with Seller Financing and Speculating with Leon Yang

80 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

Using Lease Options
Another Option used by investors as an exit strategy is known as the "lease option" or "lease purchase." This
arrangement is actually two separate parts: the lease and the option.
The lease is just like any other rental lease, where the tenant moves into the home and makes monthly rent
payments.
The option is a legal agreement that gives the tenant the legal right to buy the home at a pre-determined
price in a pre-determined length of time. The option makes it illegal for the landlord to sell the property to
any other investor during the pre-determined time period. In exchange for the tenant's sole "option" to buy
the property, the tenant will pay an upfront non-refundable "option fee" that will typically be later applied
toward the purchase.
Real World Example:

John and Sally would like to buy a house from Fred, the investor, but lack the
down payment and credit requirements to get a loan for themselves. Fred has a
mortgage on the property himself, so he cannot carry the contract and provides
seller financing instead. Fred does a thorough background and credit check on
John and Sally and decides they would be good candidates for this. The parties
then sign both a lease agreement and an option agreement, giving John and
Sally the right to buy the home for $100,000 any time in the next two years.
John and Sally provide a $5,000 option fee and move in.
In the example above, there are several different endings that might occur:
 John and Sally are able to get traditional financing from a bank and end up buying the

property from Fred sometime during the two years. The $5,000 option fee will apply toward
their down payment.

 John and Sally decide they don't want to buy the house and leave within the first two years

(or at the two-year point.) The $5,000, being non-refundable, is Fred's to keep. He then can
decide to sell it, do another lease option (collecting another non-refundable fee from the
next tenants), or do whatever he wants with the property.

 John and Sally may find, after two years, they cannot yet get a traditional mortgage. Fred

may sign another "option" with them for another year or two, possibly increasing the
purchase price and option fee.

A lease option gives options to the seller. The lease option is oftentimes a great alternative if you find
yourself in a changing market and cannot sell a property, but don't want to simply discount the price. It gives
the seller the ability to win in any situation - if any of the three endings above occur, the investor comes out
okay.

81 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

Three Advantages of a Lease Option Strategy
A Great Short-Term Exit Strategy for a Slow Market.
Flipping a property in the current real estate market can be difficult and costly. Doing a lease purchase can
provide positive cash flow ,while giving the owner the opportunity to wait for the market to improve and lock
in a possible buyer.

Lease Option Tenants Usually Take Better Care of Your Property.
Tenants who have a lease option often feel more like "buyers" than "tenants" and, as such, often take much
better care of the property than a typical renter. Tenants can also be made responsible for small repairs in
preparation for their becoming homeowners.

No Real Estate Commission Required.
Unless you find the lease option "tenant/buyer" through a real estate agent, you won't owe a commission
when it comes time to sell via your option contract. Besides being able to market the home slightly higher
due to the flexibility you are offering your tenant, you can save up to 6% when the tenant buys your
property.

Three Disadvantages of a Lease Option Strategy
While lease-options often present a terrific "win-win" for all parties involved, there are some downsides to be
aware of before jumping in.

The Dreaded "Due on Sale" Danger.
While technically no sale took place, many argue that a "lease with an option to buy" can indeed trigger a
"due on sale" clause because it transfers an interest in the property. The language in the law that determines
when a bank can trigger the due on sale clause is cloudy at best, and while this may be a gray area, it is
ultimately up to the bank to decide if they want to call the note due and force you to pay back the entire loan
within 30 days. Should this happen, you could challenge this in court, but that also would require significant
financial resources.

You Can't Sell the Property to Anyone Else.
During the option period, the tenant has the exclusive right to buy the home. If prices suddenly rise, you are
locked in at a certain price with the tenant and cannot sell for more. Also, if the market begins to drop and go
downhill, you cannot sell to get out of the deal, either until the "option" is no longer binding.

You Could Be Sued.
There is a story on the BiggerPockets blog about an investor who was sued by a tenant, who claimed (after
being evicted for not exercising their option to buy) he had "equity" in the home. While the tenant had very
little (or no) legal grounds to stand on, the tenant still cost the investor time and money in court fees, hoping
for a settlement.
82 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

One final note about lease options: Very few lease option tenants ever actually utilize their "option" and
purchase the property. As a result, some unscrupulous investors have used the lease option strategy to take
advantage of tenants, offering a lease option to individuals who will never qualify for a mortgage and
charging outrageously high option fees and short terms, just hoping the tenant doesn't buy. These investors
then re-churn the process over and over again. This usually leaves the tenant in a worse position than when
they began the process. BiggerPockets does not approve of this practice and instead asks that you to treat
your tenants with respect and dignity. Taking advantage of others for profit is what gives real estate investors
a bad name. Don't do it.
For more information on Lease Options, check out:
•

Rent to Own Homes

•

Lease Options as a Tool to Rock Out Your Rental Properties

•

BP Podcast 041: How to Profit Through Long Term Flipping and Lease Options with Douglas Larson

1031-Exchanges: Avoiding Taxes On a Sale
As with any business venture, when you are successful, Uncle Sam is
there to collect his share. When it comes time to sell a property that you
own, chances are you will have significant taxes due, especially if you
followed the advice in this guide and bought a great deal. Thankfully, if
you are paying taxes in the United States, the government provides a
way to "defer" those taxes to a later time.
There are a number of rules that need to be followed, but if done
correctly, you can possibly re-use the money you would have paid
towards capital gains tax, and you can use it as funds for your next
property. Essentially, this is the government's way of "partnering" with
you on your investment deals. There are a lot of complicated things that go into a 1031-exchange, so be sure
to talk to a qualified tax specialist before making any decisions.

Your Next Steps
At the end of this chapter, you should have a clear understanding of how to eventually get out of your real
estate investment. When you begin with the end in mind, you make it much easier to unload your property
and clear a nice profit.

83 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

In this guide, we have covered nearly every facet of getting started in real estate investing. In chapter 1, we
looked at what investing is, what it's not, and what you need to get started. Chapter 2 looked at the proper
way to gain a good educational foundation before jumping in to the real estate game, while chapter 3
examined the many different strategies and niches you can get use to build wealth with real estate. Chapter
4 laid the groundwork for a successful real estate business plan and chapter 5 looked at the best way to
prepare and shop for your first investment property. In chapter 6 we dove into the important world of real
estate financing, and chapter 7 covered marketing. Finally, chapter 8 dealt with the importance of beginning
with the end in mind and how to plan your exit strategy for each property you buy.
While you have reached the end of The BiggerPockets Ultimate Beginner's Guide to Real Estate Investing,
your journey is just beginning. You now should have a very clear understanding of what real estate investing
is and how you can begin to profit from it. Now it's time to put it into practice. If you have not yet done so,
please head over to BiggerPockets.com and sign up for a free account.
BiggerPockets is a community of over 219,000 real estate entrepreneurs who
are here to help build each other up with knowledge and support. They are
also using the site to network and to find partners and clients. We want you to
be a part of our community. Ask (or answer) questions on the forums, read the
recent blog posts, create a company profile for your business, or just hang out
with other investors. You are the average of the five people you associate with
most, so if you are not currently associating with successful real estate
investors, let BiggerPockets help you with that.
That's it! Thanks for taking time to read the BiggerPockets Ultimate Beginner's
Guide to Real Estate Investing. You now have the tools... it's time to get to work. We'll see you over
on BiggerPockets.com
P.S. Still unsure where to start? Why not check out the BiggerPockets Start Here page.

84 | Real Estate Exit Strategies

Guide To
REAL ESTATE
INVESTING
TM

Guide
To
Real Estate
Investing

DISCLOSURE
This publication and the accompanying materials are designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered in it. It is provided with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or other professional opinions. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the
service of a competent professional should be sought. Reproduction or translation of any part of the information contained
herein, in any form or by any means, without the written permission of the owner is unlawful. The educational training
program provided hereunder is not designed or intended to qualify students for employment. It is intended solely for the
avocation, personal enrichment, and enjoyment of students.
All forms contained herein are provided for educational purposes only. The provider does not assert any warranty,
express or implied, as to the legal effect and/or completeness of the forms. The provider hereby disclaims any and
all liability with respect to these forms. The provider suggests that you contact an attorney to ensure that the forms are
modified to meet the laws of your state.
The sample list of website resources contained herein are provided solely for educational purposes and as a convenience,
and does not imply our sponsorship, endorsement or approval of any website or company, its sponsors, products and/
or services offered on its website or otherwise, or any of its advertisers. The publisher does not maintain the website(s)
or assume any responsibility for the accuracy, content and current status of any information provided. Please also note
that the locations on the site(s) can change without notice.

Disclosure for Foreclosure and Equity Sharing Techniques
The Foreclosure Training course or foreclosure content presented in Company trainings, products and services are
intended to provide generalized broad-based experiential real estate foreclosure and pre-foreclosure training techniques.
This information is not intended to provide legal advice or detailed guidance on how to properly conduct foreclosure
and/or pre-foreclosure activity in your state. As with any regulated activity, we strongly recommend that you consult with
an attorney.
There are currently a growing number of states that have enacted legislation that could impact how you participate
in foreclosure and/or pre-foreclosure activities in those states. Violations of these laws may result in civil and criminal
penalties, including damages, fines and terms of imprisonment. For more information about these laws, please refer to
the additional information located at the following website: http://richdadeducation.com

Rich Dad™ Education
1612 E. Cape Coral Parkway Cape Coral, Florida 33904
© 2006-2010 Rich Dad Education All Rights Reserved.
The Rich Dad word mark and logos are owned by Rich Dad Operating Company, LLC. and
any use of such marks by Rich Dad Education is under license.
10RDE0100 v1 7-10

Important Note:
Be sure you contact your local real estate professional or real estate lawyer to research the appropriate documents
that are required for all real estate transactions in your state.

Guide to real estate investing
Table Of Contents

guide to real estate investing

introduction:
Investing In Your Future..........................................................1
The Major Benefits Of Real Estate...........................................2
A Market Full Of Opportunities..............................................5

Chapter 1:
The Circle Of Wealth......................................................................11
Many Property Types and Business Strategies..........................12
The Circle Of Wealth And Multiple Income Streams.................13
Types Of Earned Streams Of Income.....................................14
Types Of Passive Streams Of Income.....................................14
Types Of Portfolio Streams Of Income In Real Estate.................16
An Introduction To Some Key Areas Of Real Estate Investment....17
Making The Right Income Stream Choices..............................18
Wholesale Buying.............................................................20
Lease Options...................................................................22
Foreclosures.....................................................................23
It’s A Learning Process........................................................24
Chapter 2:
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation.............................27
History Is A Great Teacher - And Predictor Of The Future...........27
How Does That Relate To Today’s Markets..............................30
If Educated Investors Don’t Buy Emotionally, How Do They Buy?.30
You’ve Got to Know When to Hold—and When to Fold!.........32
What This Means To You ...................................................33

Chapter 3:
Getting To Know Your Market.............................................37
True Market Value..............................................................38
Defining The Area You Will Invest In......................................38
Segmenting Your Area........................................................39
Deciding What Area You Want To Focus On..........................41
Determining Property Values Using Comps..............................41
What The Comparables Will Tell You....................................42
Chapter 4:
Selecting A Power Team.....................................................47
Finding The Right Real Estate Professional...............................47
Choosing The Right Real Estate Professional............................48
Not Too Big, Not Too Small, Just Right!!! . .............................49
Real Estate Professional Interview Script.................................50
Finding The Right Mortgage Broker.......................................52
Mortgage Broker Interview .................................................53
Community Banker ..........................................................54
Contractor Handyman........................................................55
Tax Professional.................................................................56
Appraiser.........................................................................56
Lawyer............................................................................56
Title Company..................................................................56
Home Inspection Professional...............................................57
Surveyor..........................................................................57
Termite Inspectors..............................................................57
Insurance Agent................................................................57
Property Manager.............................................................58
Mentor............................................................................58
Government Grant and Loan Specialists................................58
Networking Contacts.........................................................58

Guide to real estate investing
Table Of Contents

Chapter 5:
Finding Motivated Sellers...................................................63
What Is A Motivated Seller?................................................63
How Do We Find Them?....................................................64
Niche Marketing...............................................................77
Networking Resources........................................................81
Chapter 6:
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales.........................................91
Where To Find Wholesale Deals..........................................92
Driving For Dollars.............................................................93
Assignment Of Contract And Double Closing..........................96
Contingencies...................................................................97
Title Companies or Closing Attorneys....................................99
Building A Database Of Buyers..........................................100
Advertise To Find Your Buyer..............................................104
What To Offer................................................................105
Negotiating With The Seller..............................................107
Contracts.......................................................................108
Why Wholesaling?.........................................................110
Exit Strategies.................................................................112
Chapter 7:
Securing The Financing.................................................... 117
Getting Creative.............................................................117
Working With Mortgage Brokers.......................................118
Calling Mortgage Brokers.................................................119
Pre-Qualified Vs. Pre-Approved..........................................120
Questions To Ask Mortgage Brokers....................................121
Seller Financing..............................................................126
Other Low Or No Money Down Techniques.........................130

Chapter 8:
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options................ 149
Elements Of A Standard Option Contract.............................150
What Is A Lease Option...................................................151
Benefits Of A Lease Option...............................................152
Buying And Selling With A Lease Option.............................155
Who And What We Are Looking For?................................157
Working With The Motivated Seller....................................162
Things To Agree On With The Seller...................................168
Sample Contracts and Documents To Use As The Buyer..........169
Bulletproof Your Option With The Seller...............................171
Bulletproof Your Option With Your Tenant/Buyer...................173
Finding Tenant/Buyers For The Deal....................................175
Meeting With Your Potential Tenant/Buyer...........................178
How Do I Qualify Them?..................................................179
Sample Contracts and Documents Used by The Seller............180
13 Steps To Being Successful In Lease Options.....................188
How To Do A Lease Option..............................................191
Points To Consider...........................................................193
Sample Car Magnet Ads..................................................194
Sample Newspaper Ads..................................................195
Sample Signs And Flyers...................................................197
Sample Postcards............................................................198
Sample Property Information Sheet......................................199
Sample Authorization To Release Information Form.................200
Sample Letter Of Instructions To Lender.................................201
Sample Residential Lease With Option................................202

Guide to real estate investing
Table Of Contents

Chapter 9:
Becoming A Problem Solver: Foreclosures.......................... 207
What Is Foreclosure?.......................................................208
The Three Phases Of Foreclosure........................................211
The System For Buying Pre-Foreclosures................................216
Sample Authorization To Release Information........................259
Sample Bill Of Sale.........................................................260
Sample Affadavit And Memorandum Of Agreement...............261
Sample Car Magnet Ad...................................................262
Sample Newspaper Ad....................................................262
Sample Letter And Flyer....................................................263
Chapter 10:
Negotiating With Confidence........................................... 269
Practice Talking To Get Over Fears.....................................269
Listen To The Seller...........................................................270
Communication And Salesmanship.....................................270
The Anatomy Of A Presentation..........................................272
Chapter 11:
Making An Offer: The Contract......................................... 279
The Offer Vs. The Contract................................................280
Basic Requirements Of A Contract......................................281
Sample Contract For Purchase And Sale..............................283
Glossary: .................................................................. 309

G

Guide to real estate investing
Introduction

introduction
Investing In
Your Future
T

hrough real estate investing,

Demand for real estate in most areas is

many individuals just like you

constant although there are economic

have been able to increase their net

factors that influence the market and

worth substantially, obtain the things

its demands. The good news is that

they always wanted to have, reached

when the economy is in a slump,

their financial goals faster than they

there are tremendous opportunities for

thought possible, and preserved their

good real estate deals because the

wealth for their retirement and/or their

number of buyers decreases along

families. And many

have done so

with tougher economic times. Now

without much money to start with, or

is just such a time and that makes

without any money to start with at all.

investing in real estate more lucrative

The fact is, real estate investing is

than ever. The key to building wealth

a powerful tool for building and

through real estate is having the

preserving wealth no matter where you

knowledge to understand the market

live and no matter who you are. And

swings and pressures and then being

unlike some investment opportunities,

able to capitalize on the opportunities

real estate investing has “staying

as you find them. There will always

power.”

be a never-ending supply of buyers
1

looking for everything from their first home to

This appreciation rate generally takes

their retirement home—and you will be the

place as part of natural market growth,

investor who has exactly what these buyers

essentially, without you doing anything.

need.

To illustrate, consider homeowners who

Before we go into greater detail in

purchased their homes 20 years ago

this manual about profiting with real estate,

and now find themselves with $150,000

locating and negotiating deals, evaluating

in equity in their homes, something they

properties, and making the most out of some

never thought about at the time they

of real estate’s best opportunities, let’s take

purchased the home. Beyond that, you

a brief look at the real estate investment

can create situations where you “force”

market in general to see why it provides so

appreciation, such as through renovations

many avenues for building wealth.

or cosmetic improvements to a home (we
call this rehabbing properties). This is

THE MAJOR BENEFITS
OF REAL ESTATE

where the work you put into a property
makes it instantly more valuable than the
price you paid for it.

The benefits of investing in real estate are

• Generate positive cash flow

many, from creating situations where your

you can use – Some investors will

profit potential is up to you, to building a

purchase property in order to rent it out

lifestyle some people only dream of. With

and create positive monthly cash flow.

real estate, you can:

Property can sometimes be rented for
more than the total expenses (principal

• Own your own business

and interest, taxes and insurance), so

Work part-time or full-time, be your own

you can make money from the rental,

boss, and time things according to your

while someone else is building equity in

schedule and goals.

your property. Another way to buy and
hold property is to lease it to someone

2

• Take advantage of appreciation

else with an option for them to purchase

Real estate typically appreciates around

it in the future.

four to five percent annually.

excellent positive monthly cash flow since

This technique creates

Guide to real estate investing
Introduction

these tenants are willing to pay more than the average renter will
pay.
• Create a hedge against inflation – Even in times of
inflation, opportunities abound with real estate. That’s because
inflation tends to force higher real estate prices and because the
underlying asset (your property) can be counted on to be there
through inflation (while some other investments may not survive
economic downturns).
• Make money with low risk and low startup
costs – The market for potential customers is huge and you
can start your business in real estate investing with little or even
no capital of your own. There are always private investors in the
marketplace who have the money to invest but do not know how
(or don’t care to do the work) to do the deals themselves.
• Profit from equity buildup – You build equity at the
same time as the property is naturally increasing in value due to
market conditions and demand. And you can tap that equity in a
property to finance additional investments.
• Enjoy multiple channels for profit – There are many
ways to invest in real estate and there is something for everyone,
from the casual or first-time investor to the more experienced or
full-time investor. Once you understand the variety of opportunities
available, you can choose the deals that help you reach your
individual goals faster.

3

• Benefit

from

real

estate’s

repeatability – Once you learn the

many easy ways to find the opportunities
that will help you succeed.

basics, learning advanced skills is even
easier than you might realize. You can

• Market your business easily

use the knowledge you build about real

Marketing real estate is not complicated.

estate investing to repeat the process

Everything from a For Sale sign in the front

over and over again, on multiple types

yard of a home you have renovated to

of properties, increasing your profits

an ad or direct mail campaign can bring

considerably without working harder to

in customers. Some investors have netted

do so.

thousands of dollars in profit on deals
simply because someone called them

• Benefit from tax breaks – When

from a car magnet ad on the side of their

you invest in real estate, consult with a

vehicle or from a flyer they posted on a

tax professional about the opportunities

community bulletin board at an apartment

that may be available to you through

complex.

depreciation, in writing off certain business
expenses, and through tax breaks (for

• Build a power team to help

example, deducting the interest portion of

you increase and expedite your

mortgage payments).

profits – To succeed with real estate
investing, you will want to establish solid
properties

relationships throughout your community

and opportunities easily – With

and in the business… relationships with

real estate investing, opportunities are

people who can help you build your

all around you. You can make a simple

business, partner with you in investments,

effort, like driving through neighborhoods

or be available to buy your properties.

looking for For Sale By Owner signs, or

A winning team of contacts would

you can do everything from establishing

include people like a good real estate

relationships with real estate professionals

lawyer, real estate agents or brokers, an

to placing your own ads to generate leads.

accountant or tax expert, a mortgage

What’s nice to know is that regardless of

broker, a professional home inspector,

the time you have available, there are

mentors or coaches who can guide

• Find

4

investment

Guide to real estate investing
Introduction

you through transactions and help motivate you, and qualified
contractors, builders, and other professionals who can assist you
in rehabbing your properties.
• Help others – One great aspect of real estate investing
is you can help others in need. Consider someone who has a
distressed property because they live in another state and they’re
trying to manage it long distance. You could help alleviate that
burden. Or consider someone who is struggling with debt and
now the bank is going to foreclose on their home. You could
help them save their credit. The possibilities for helping others are
endless.

A MARKET FULL OF OPPORTUNITIES

There are not only many benefits associated with real estate, but
also many opportunities for success regardless of your financial
goals, location, or financial situation.
Short-term and long-term strategies
With real estate, there are both short-term and long-term investment
strategies available to you, giving you the flexibility to make
investment choices that fit your schedule and needs.
	As an example, you may wish to hold properties only for the
short-term, so you might purchase a property below fair market
value, fix it up with minor repairs and cosmetic improvements (such
as painting and landscaping), and then turn around and sell it
quickly for profit.

5

	You can even purchase or contract for a

Opportunities in all areas

distressed property at well below fair market
value, and sell either the property or the right

You can make money with real estate

to buy the property, immediately to another

regardless of the area you live or invest in.

investor who will do all the work improving

This book will begin helping you to become

the property. This short-term strategy is known

knowledgeable about how to analyze and

as “quick-turning” or wholesaling properties.

identify profit potential in real estate markets.

Individuals have made fast profits of thousands

Your future training will take you to the next

of dollars on just one deal in wholesaling

level and to those who are committed, the

a property and you can too! Additionally,

potential for wealth accumulation will be

investors have used wholesaling strategies to

unlimited.

make quick cash to pay down their debts,

Just a few examples of ways to build

generate extra income in addition to a full-

wealth follow and illustrate this point. For

time job, start their own business slowly and

example, in low-income areas, you can find

with limited risk, and create capital for future

several great opportunities for rehabbing or

investments.

wholesaling properties. These opportunities

	A long-term strategy might be to buy

allow

a home below fair market value and then

affordable, clean housing for low-income

rent it out for any number of years or lease

families, while generating positive cash flow

it to someone else giving them an option to

through highly profitable weekly or monthly

purchase it in the future. In situations like these,

rentals. When you act as the intermediary

when you have tenants, they are building

investor, they provide a way to generate

your equity because with every payment they

income through either quick turns after

make to you, you are taking that payment

the rehab or fast cash through wholesale

and decreasing your existing mortgage.

techniques.

the

owner/landlord

to

provide

	In moderate-income areas, you can
profit from excellent resale values and work
with a large market of first-time homebuyers
who may need special financing options
to purchase their home. Moderate-income
areas can also provide good rental income
opportunities.
6

Guide to real estate investing
Introduction

	In just above median home value areas there are currently
great prospects for two techniques: either offering lease options
to potential homebuyers, or buying at substantial discounts due to
distressed seller situations and then holding the properties for shortterm for profits at the time of sale.
	And finally, there is tremendous opportunity in some of the best
neighborhoods and school districts in the cities across the U. S. due
to the distress of the sellers who must get out of a property quickly.
While not for the beginning investor, these types of deals can give
experienced investors the opportunity to invest when tax shelters are
the priority.
Evaluating Buy & Hold Properties
If you intend to buy and hold property for cash flow, it is important
that you choose properties that will cash flow—and the United States
has an abundance of properties available that will meet your needs!
Having said that, if you are considering rental housing consider
carefully the benefits of buying houses that have more than one
stream of income coming in each month. For example, if you are
buying a single family house to rent out, if it is vacant for a month,
you are making the entire mortgage payment. However, if instead
of buying single family houses to rent out you focus on duplexes,
triplexes, and quads, if one of the units is empty, you still have the
other(s) to help cover your expenses. That is part of the beauty of
real estate—various tweaks on your buying decisions can make
big differences in the outcome of the deal. And in this scenario, the
price of a duplex is seldom anywhere close to double the price of
the single family. Yet, the rents from each unit are not half as much as
the single family’s rental income price. For that reason, it is unusual
for us to recommend you buy and rent out single family homes in
working class neighborhoods. Go for the duplex! On the other
7

hand, in the upper income neighborhoods,

• Seller financing – You can take

lease options work beautifully on single

advantage of seller financing, lease

family homes because you will be dealing

options, etc., to allow you to purchase

with future buyers of the property from the

properties with little or no money down.

beginning. Knowing what to buy, where to
buy, and how to hold will move you to your

• Sources

financial dreams more quickly than you can

(capital)

imagine—the opportunities are endless!

investment – Even people with poor

Multiple financing options
Real estate investing can be done virtually
anywhere by anyone—the key is knowledge.
It provides a way for any individual to
get involved and reach their financial
goals, regardless of their current financial
situation. That’s because there are many
creative financing and buying approaches
available. You just have to know where and
how to look for them. For example, you can
find opportunities through:
• Government programs – There
are many ways to purchase homes
well below fair market value through
government-sponsored programs, and
there are ways to use government
programs to find opportunities you could
not find anywhere else.

8

for
to

seed

money

finance

your

credit have still been able to achieve
success in real estate investing; you just
have to know how to look for the creative
financing opportunities. Some examples
include seller financing, wraparound
mortgages, equity financing, partnering
with other investors, etc.
So, for many reasons, real estate provides
people with opportunities to profit and
earn income in ways they never would
have dreamed possible. The more you
learn and the more prepared you are
to take on new opportunities, the better
you’ll succeed in generating amazing
profits and changing your life forever. We
are dedicated to helping you get there.
So let’s get started!

chapter
one

9

EARNED
3-4 Streams

PORTFOLIO
2-3 Streams

PASSIVE
3-4 Streams

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

the circle of
wealth Multiple

Streams Of Income In
Real Estate Investing
creating your personal
business road map

i

The same is true for choosing
to invest in business. Having a clear
idea of the benefits and advantages
of different types of real estate deals,

f you were going to travel from

clearly evaluating where you are in

	New York City to San Francisco,

terms of resources, and moving in the

there are such good road signs and

right direction with the least amount

highways systems across the United

of wasted time will be a tremendous

States that you could probably find

asset to you. That is the purpose of

your way without having a detailed

this chapter—to help you begin to

road map that outlined your journey.

get more clear about where you are,

But doing so wouldn’t make much

where you want to go, and the best

sense, would it? You would end up

way to get there.

taking a few wrong turns, you’d have

	One of the first things you should

trouble getting started, and ultimately,

do is a personal financial evaluation

you would be sure to get lost a few

of where you are at this moment in

times along the way.

time. Do you have strong or weak
11

credit? Do you have access to money
lending sources? Are they public (lenders,
banks,

mortgage

brokers)

or

private

(personal contacts who might be willing to
help you to get started)? Once you have
clearly delineated your current position you
are better able to begin choosing the right

Technique/
circumstance
			

Benefit
			

Wholesale buying
& contract sales

Quick cash
return/low cash
investment

Lease Option

Cash flow,
appreciation/
can be structured
with a low cash
investment

Foreclosure

Quick cash
(short-term), needs
some cash to do

types of deals to move you towards financial
freedom. For example, if you have few
financial or credit resources, you will want
to choose types of real estate deals (at least
in the early stages of your career) that do
not rely on either credit or funding. One of
these types of deals is called “wholesaling.”
So, let’s begin this chapter by outlining the

		
Rehabbing

various ways to make money—and the type
of money it takes to do that kind of deal.

MANY PROPERTY TYPES AND
INVESTMENT STRATEGIES

Mobile Homes

Cash flow/low
cash investment

Real estate investing is attractive because

Tax Liens & Deeds

Portfolio income
from interest/
higher cash
investment/little
leverage

Property
Management
(Managing other
investors’ property)

Cash flow/
very low cash
investment
needed to begin

there are many property types to invest in,
as well as many strategies for what to do
with those properties. And each comes with
its own rewards. The following are some of
the main types of investment opportunities,
with their primary benefits listed.

12

Quick cash,
cash flow/needs
cash or credit
investment

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

	Investors consider different options based on the outcome they
want to achieve, the amount of cash they want to invest in the
project, and/or their level of experience with different strategies.
For example, an investor may want to consider quick cash
investment strategies for a variety of reasons, among them being
high consumer debt (generating quick cash to pay down that debt)
or lack of seed capital to work with (using wholesale opportunities
to quickly build more money for future investments).
Of course, with multiple income streams and opportunities
comes the need to obtain the proper knowledge to specialize
in different areas. Because wholesaling, foreclosures, and lease
options are some of the more popular ones in real estate investing,
we have included chapters focused specifically on those strategies
in this manual. This book also introduces you to several other streams
of income in real estate investment and defines the types of income
those strategies can produce. As you grow your business and find
the real estate investment areas and strategies that interest you most,
you can discuss with us more opportunities for advanced training in
those areas so you can maximize your profit potential.

The Circle of Wealth and
Multiple Income Streams

You might be wondering how to choose your streams of income
and what factors should influence your decision, so before we go
any deeper into this book, let’s take some time to define the various
types of income and the benefits of choosing one over the other.

13

Types of Earned Streams
of Income in Real Estate:

deals, you collect the rent (or your property
manager collects it for you) every single
month. Another real estate related field of
income that would be considered passive

• Wholesaling
• 	Foreclosures, Pre-foreclosures, and
Real Estate Owned Properties (Postforeclosures)
• Rehabbing

is when you become a property manager,
have a property management company,
and investors hire you to collect the rents for
them and pay you a fee to do it!

Types of passive Streams
of Income in Real Estate:

• Probate
• 	Discount Note Selling
• Remodeling
• Land Development
Basically, anything that you are going to

• Rentals— houses, apartments,
mobile homes, etc.
•	Leases— lease option properties
• Property Management—
mentioned above

contract and sell quickly would fall into the
Earned Income category.

• Recreational Parks— where you
rent out spaces

Passive Income: Passive income is
money that comes to you week after week

• Mobile Home Parks— where you

or month after month without you going

rent out lots and others own the

out and doing another deal. This type of

mobile homes

income is also sometimes called “recurring
income.”

In real estate, these would be

•	Apartment Houses— which bring

your buy and hold properties—your rentals

you in multiple payments every month

and leases. Once you have closed on these
14

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

• Commercial Spaces— offices, retail establishments,
storage unit facilities, industrial buildings, etc.
Buy and hold properties are where you build long-term wealth and
begin to benefit from appreciation and tax advantages. So, earned
income streams help you generate the cash to move towards buy
and hold long term wealth! The two work hand in hand to help you
achieve your goals.
Portfolio Income: Portfolio income is when your money begins
to make money for you—typically through interest. Let’s say you
have $30,000 to invest in some type of real estate related deal but
you do not want to have to do any work or invest any time once
you have made your purchase. In this situation, you might choose to
invest that money in tax liens that earn a return of 18% per year. You
attend the tax lien auction, purchase liens that take the $30,000
investment amount, and then you sit back and wait for them to be
redeemed! Your money begins earning interest at the rate of 18%
per year the day you pay for the liens and the county property tax
office employee does all the monitoring and paperwork! That sure
beats investing in a CD at 1% or 2% interest, doesn’t it?
There are several other ways for you to generate portfolio
income that is real estate related, as well. Most of these streams of
income relate to the investor earning interest on his or her money.
While this book will not go into depth on these techniques, it is
important for you to at least understand the potential and definition
of these income streams.

15

Types of portfolio Streams
of Income in Real Estate:

New investors who have a limited
amount of money begin by becoming
knowledgeable in a few earned income
streams such as wholesale, foreclosure, and
rehabbing. Now they have more control

• Tax Lien Auction Investments

over their ability to generate large amounts of
cash in a short period of time. They then take

•	Discount Note Buying

that money and begin to invest in buy and
hold properties such as lease option houses.

•	Seller Financing

They have now learned to invest safely, and
once we learn to do it safely, we can do

•	Hard Money Lending

it quickly!
	As the passive income grows or the lease

•	Venture Capital

option properties begin to sell (usually three
years later), the investor has two choices:

In real estate, you will often hear others refer

either buy another buy and hold property or

to “The Circle of Wealth.” Real estate can

invest in a portfolio stream (such as tax liens,

allow investors to create wealth through a

defined above).

very systematic process that builds

Begin to train your mind to

upon itself. Here’s how it looks

think in terms of The Circle of

EARNED
3-4 Streams

and how it works:
While everyone is

yourself what your short

different, with different

and long term goals are

goals and demands on

at any given moment.

their time, professional
real estate investors will

PORTFOLIO
2-3 Streams

PASSIVE
3-4 Streams

Yes, we get rich in buy
and hold situations, so

typically want to have

that is your ultimate goal,

three to five streams (and

but if you are beginning with

accompanying

knowledge

bases) of earned income, three to five

16

Wealth and always ask

limited resources and need to
generate some cash so you can build a

streams of passive income, and two to three

substantial portfolio in a fairly modest number

streams of portfolio income.

of years, earned income can help you do that.

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

An Important Consideration: As investors, it is crucial for
us to “begin with the end in mind.” Now, I realize that you might
be starting on a shoestring and you probably have immediate
needs that you want real estate to assist you in fulfilling. However,
this business can be one of the best ways for you to become a
millionaire or a multi-millionaire—and on some level you understand
that or you wouldn’t be reading this book. So, set aside your fear
and discouragement from yesterday and ask yourself, “If I could
retire in ten years and own and control 350 apartments in a good
neighborhood that produced $25,000 a month in positive cash
flow, would I feel safe and secure about my financial future and
my golden years?” I believe that most of you would answer this
question with a resounding, “Yes!”
	So, let’s begin your investing business with that level of
commitment to your future. The Circle of Wealth can help you
achieve those goals. Consider it carefully and ask yourself what it
could mean to your current lifestyle (and checkbook balance) if you
had 7-10 streams of income and could generate both short and long
term cash flow. Then, commit to your future, to your accumulation of
knowledge, and to having a mentor to guide you along the way.

An Introduction To Some Key Areas of
Real Estate Investment Covered in This Book

Before we delve deeper into these subjects, let’s take a moment to
discuss some of the key property and investment types in overview
form to familiarize you with some of your options and prepare you
for what you are about to learn from this material.

17

As professional investors, we weigh each

Making The Right
Income Stream Choices

deal against the ideal and then consider the
benefits of that type of deal versus another
opportunity. We do not always hit each one

Distressed Properties Vs. Distressed
Or Motivated Sellers

of these characteristics—particularly in the
beginning of our investment careers—but we
always evaluate and make informed choices.

There is an old maxim when it comes to real
estate investing: “There are only two types of
deals out there—either distressed properties
or distressed sellers.” Regardless of your
investment strategy or targeted property type,
you will find that some properties provide
more ideal investment opportunities than
others. When we refer to a property as
“ideal,” we do so for a reason. The word is
also an acronym for the following:

When considering a distressed property,
we are looking for the following advantages:
• There is often less competition for
them since the average individual wants
properties in good condition.
• Most market areas offer numerous
distressed properties to choose from.
•	You can often purchase distressed
properties under flexible, easy terms

I	

and for prices substantially below

= Income (Produces Cash Flow)

market value, making for a nice profit
D	

=Depreciable (Offers Tax Advantages)

margin on a resale or good cash flow
on a rental.

E	

=Equity (Equity Build-up Increase Net
•	You have the ability to instantly

Worth)

increase your property’s value through
A	

minor improvements and rehab

=Appreciation (Increases in Value)

work (forced appreciation).
L	

=Leverage
Investment)

18

(Increases

Return

on

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

Some things to think about with distressed properties include:
• Most real estate markets have a sizable number of investors
looking for these types of properties, so your marketing efforts
need to be active, well planned, and effective to find good
deals. It would be wise to investigate different marketing
strategies that have worked well for other real estate
investors, and to find others in the business that are willing to
teach you where to look for opportunities and provide tips
on how to bring opportunities to you.
• To avoid costly mistakes, you’ll need to know how to
effectively evaluate the property and its neighborhood.
• Thorough inspections and repair estimates should be
performed prior to a purchase.
•	If the property is in a lower income and/or older
neighborhood, the comparable sales in that area will
not go over a certain amount of money, no matter how much
improvement is made. Repairs are often costly—so in order
to maximize profitability in the older, lower income areas, it
is typically safer to combine a distressed property with a
distressed seller and maximize the profit potential on
each aspect.

19

Advantages of working with distressed
sellers include:

•	You must know what put the seller in the
situation they are currently in and figure
out the best way to help them get out

• There is seller distress in every price
range.

of it. In order to understand their
problem and solve it, you will need to
develop good listening and negotiating

•	You can sometimes purchase

skills.

properties under flexible and easy
terms. The seller needs help and, in

•	Some distressed sellers present

many cases, just needs a way out,

compelling reasons why they want to

but does not know what to do. You

stay in their properties and the

can provide the solution.

tendency is to want to accommodate
this. If their challenge is for financial

•	Seller distress is often caused by
property distress, so the chances

reasons, this can be risky. It is important
to keep your emotions out of it.

of being able to increase property
value through cosmetic improvements
or rehabbing when you can match

wholesale buying

a distressed seller with a distressed
property are excellent.

Distressed

properties

make

for

great

wholesaling candidates. And wholesaling is
Things to think about with distressed sellers

an excellent opportunity because it requires

include:

little expertise and typifies the quick cash

•	Seller distress must be handled
delicately. These sellers are going
through rough personal, professional,
or financial times and they can be
experiencing all kinds of emotions.

type of deal that many beginning investors
are looking for.
Wholesale deals may be one of the
first types of deals you will make in real
estate investing because it’s easy to identify
distressed properties and there is such great
potential for quick cash.

20

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

To truly be successful with wholesaling, some of the things you
will need to learn include how to: properly segment your market;
develop a database of potential properties, investors, and buyers;
understand the multiple ways to target and market for wholesale
deals; locate absentee owners; build a network with other investors;
and develop key strategies that will help you close deals.
In addition, you should master several basic aspects of the
wholesaling business, including:
Prescreening prospects – Since distressed properties should
be your primary target, you should learn how to both identify and
evaluate distressed properties. You should also understand that a
distressed property does not necessarily mean a deal is good, but
that it is a good start. So you need to master the techniques to
know when a deal is too good to be true, when it’s time to move
forward, and when the deal needs to be left on the table. It will
also help to know how to identify a motivated seller, because the
combination of a motivated seller and a distressed property will
make this opportunity far more advantageous.
Determining market value – You need to understand the
importance of determining fair market value after repairs to be a
successful wholesaler. The real estate professionals on your power
team will be key assets for getting this information. Also, using
comparable sales of homes in the same market area will help you
determine fair market value.
Estimating repairs – This won’t be a successful venture if you
do not estimate repairs correctly. Learn how to analyze deals to
ensure you make an offer that will result in the most profit. There are
21

also strategies you can learn that will save
you money on rehab projects and maximize

lease options

your profits.
Making

offers

and

counter-

offers – You need to become familiar with
good negotiating and communication skills,
learn how to make offers and counteroffers
effectively without compromising your goals,
and learn how to work with contracts.
Knowing how to properly evaluate properties
will be critical to determining not only what to
offer, but if you should make an offer at all.

Lease options represent one of the most
attractive real estate investment opportunities
for both new and experienced investors
particularly because they can generate
multiple streams of income within a single
deal. The following offers a few general
points about using lease options to invest in
real estate:
If you buy property with a lease option, you
can:

Lining up buyers – Wholesaling is actually
only partially complete if you can find and

• Gain control of a property without

negotiate deals, but you have nobody lined

taking ownership of the property –

up to readily assign contracts to. Building a

	You have no obligation to buy, but

sizable investor database to tap regardless

you have established the right to buy.

of the type of deal you are working on will
help you move things forward quickly and
preserve your profit margins.

• Work with distressed sellers, not
with distressed properties – Seller
circumstances create the deal. What

Closing effectively – You need to

you need to do is find the problem

learn the strategies necessary to close

owners.

without cash, including how to do contract
assignments and simultaneous closings.

•	Live in or control nice homes in
nice areas – In these cases, the seller
needs to get out and investors want
to get in (an excellent match!).
	Desirable neighborhoods create
demand.

22

Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth

• Help someone else in many cases – The determining
factor in lease options is often debt relief. You are usually
working with people who may not necessarily want to
sell their property, but who must sell it because of financial
problems. You can help someone else reach a solution
quickly. Meanwhile, you can do it with little or no money outof-pocket.
If you sell property with a lease option, you can:
• Benefit from a large market of motivated buyers – Lease
options can be very attractive to people who are just starting
out or who are starting over. And lease options may be the
only option available to some people based on their credit
circumstances.
•	Find multiple profit centers through lease options – You can
create positive monthly cash flow for yourself, collect a nonrefundable option consideration, and profit from the
difference between what you paid for the property and what
price you set for your tenant/buyer.

foreclosures

The foreclosure market can also provide a great avenue for profit
for the beginning to experienced investor. Foreclosures, while
unfortunate, are an everyday occurrence, and this can be your
opportunity to not only make a wise investment, but also to help
someone in need.

23

Remember that foreclosures can happen

and opportunities that will afford you the

for any number of reasons, and this is an

most profit. You can learn how to line up

area where you can really create a win-win

investors before you buy properties to limit

situation and do something that benefits both

your risk and how to line up potential buyers

you and the person who might be in trouble.

before you move forward on deals. You can

Investors must be able to effectively negotiate

become adept at finding motivated sellers

with both lenders and homeowners to

simply by knowing what to look for in their

optimize profits on these deals.

ads and more successful with your sales
simply by knowing what to write in yours.

IT’S A LEARNING PROCESS

You can learn how to rehab properties to
maximize profits with minimal investment,
including what to look for and what to

With so many strategies to employ and ways

avoid, as well as how to make money by

to make money in real estate, knowledge

wholesaling properties without ever having

will be key to your success.

to fix them up. And you can master the
opportunities

negotiating strategies necessary to get the

available in real estate investing, you have

best deal or know when to walk away from

taken your first important step towards

the table.

By

investigating

the

obtaining financial independence. Now,
it’s time to move on to the next level with the
guidance and knowledge you can receive
through our program and this manual. Every
part of this program has been designed
to help you achieve increasing levels of
knowledge and success as a real estate
investor.
	You’ll soon see that with the material
presented here, you can easily learn how to
spot distressed properties, motivated sellers,

24

chapter
two

25

Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation

UNDERSTANDING
MARKET ANALYSIS
& EVALUATION
I

nvesting Is About Supply and

	Demand:

One

of

the

most

important things you can learn when
it comes to real estate investing is

History is a Great
Teacher—And
Predictor of the Future:

market analysis—having the ability to
evaluate a market, whether your own
or one in another part of the United
States, and determine if the values are
going up, going down, or are flat.
This is where amateur investors fall
short in their knowledge and this lack
of understanding creates problems for
them when they buy, hold, and sell.

A little bit of history from the past ten
years will illustrate our points as we
begin to increase our understanding
of market analysis. In 2000, the stock
market was in a self-correction process
and investors who typically put their
money in stock were worried about
their earnings and profit potential in
the short term. In any investment there
will be periodic self-corrections in a
market, whether it is real estate, stock,
or even in gold. Prices and values go

27

up, they hit a peak, they stabilize, and if

So, with the stock market in a state of

they are not in line with what the market

stagnation or self-correction, average home

will bear, they will go back down until they

interest rates lower than they had been in

reach the point that buyers will once again

over thirty years, and lending guidelines more

make purchases.

lenient than we had seen in decades, people

To add to the situation with stock
investments, in late 2001 we experienced

money and purchase homes and land.

the trauma of September 11th and there

	In essence, we had a “blue light

was more emotional fear generated by this

special” or buying frenzy kick into full gear

event than our population has seen on a

and real estate became the investment

collective level in our entire lifetimes. The

strategy of choice for many people who had

natural reaction of people in the grips of

never owned real estate, at all! Adding to

uncertainty is to do nothing—to “batten

that, investors who were disillusioned with

down the hatches” until the storm is over.

the performance of the stock market began

The problem with this reaction is the paper

pulling available revenue from this type of

currency that we operate on in the United

investing and move it to real estate.

States. The way our economy flourishes is

	On top of the stimulus of low interest rates

for the paper to keep moving. When the

and extremely relaxed lending qualifications,

flow of money stops, the economy stalls.

the first waves of baby-boomers were within

To encourage the American people to

a few years of retiring. As they saw the

buy/spend their money and keep the paper

opportunity to invest (and also saw the

moving, the Federal Reserve dropped

non-performance of their stock portfolios),

interest rates—which allowed people to buy

they began visiting retirement states and

property with far less interest expense than

purchasing their homes or condominiums

historic levels had demanded. Additionally,

earlier than they had planned. This was

loan programs were rolled out with much

typically a wise move on their part—but it

more lenient lending guidelines so many

created an increased demand on real estate

more people were able to qualify for loans

that was unexpected.

than historic guidelines in the past had
provided.

28

began to take their accessible investment

When opportunities to make money
abound, builders will rise to the occasion.

Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation

		Since there were not enough houses available to purchase,
pre-construction plans became the norm. The mantra across the
United States became, “Pay a 20% non-refundable deposit, contract
for us to build a home or condo at a pre-agreed upon price, and
when construction is complete, you can close.” That accomplished
two different things: people were working (construction picked up
dramatically, jobs were in abundance, and building materials were
flying off the shelves), and paper was moving! For the potential
investor, a feeling of “locking in a price” was of utmost importance.
If the investor was “buying” in a 20% appreciation rate market, and
if the condo was going to take two years to complete, life seemed
golden! The condo would theoretically be worth 40% more upon
completion (and closing) that the contract price! Talk about getting
rich quick—it sure felt as if the goose was laying a golden basket
of eggs!
	However, depending upon where an investor was in the
market cycle of self-correction, was there going to be a buyer
for the property to do a quick turn? In 2002, the answer was
a resounding, “You Betcha’!” However, by 2005 and 2006, the
buyers had exhausted their buying ability (run out of money) and the
markets began to stall.
	Since real estate revolves around supply and demand, if there
are not buyers that match sellers, the market will stall—which is what
happened. What a concept—ultimately, there must be someone to
live in a house or condo once it is built.

29

How Does That Relate
to Today’s Markets?

The following diagram provides a graphic
view of what happened, where we are right
now, and what to expect based upon historical
data, in the future. The solid diagonal line
(A) indicates where we should have been
in terms of appreciation. The vertical line
(B) in 2002-05 shows what happens when
demand skyrockets. The declining line (C)
illustrates what is happening across much of
the country as prices self-correct to get back

else is afraid, be greedy.” In essence, the
professional investor will typically do the
opposite of what the general population of
amateur investors is doing.

to the markets’ “normal” line of appreciation.
	Do you notice that when we have an
upward self-correction, the prices will tend
to rise too high and too fast for the market
to bear (for a period of time) and then
come down too much and too fast on the

If Educated Investors
Don’t Buy Emotionally,
How Do They Know
When (And Where) To Buy?

downward side? That is due to the tendency

30

for people to live and make decisions

Several factors in real estate drive real

based upon recency bias! If everyone else

estate prices.

is buying, they hear about it, jump on the

simply common sense), if a market has high

band wagon, and they buy! If everyone

unemployment rates, the local economic

else is afraid to buy, they jump on the

conditions are dismal, and interest rates are

band wagon, and they are afraid to buy!

high, the real estate market will stall along

Warren Buffet has a saying that comes to

with sales of other goods and services

mind in these situations, and to paraphrase

	Let’s take a moment and list the factors

him, it comes down to, “When everyone

that influence and drive the real estate

else is greedy, be afraid. When everyone

market and prices:

For example (and this is

Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation

•	Interest rates & inflation
•	Lending qualifications
•	Availability of housing
• Tourism
• Job growth and stability
•	Industry & Manufacturing
• Population growth
•	Demographic changes
Every city has historic numbers for appreciation rates—how much per
year, on a fairly long-term basis, the value of real estate increased,
on average.
	In most areas of the country, real estate goes up approximately
4-5% per year. Now, some years there may be little change in
prices, and then in other years there will be a jump to correct the
lack of growth in previous years—but when we take a 25 year
average of the median home prices, we see what the city’s average
growth has been in percentage points. That percentage tells us
what to expect for an area’s overall growth rate, prior to factoring
in anomalies such as a new factory moving into the area that brings
in thousands of new jobs.
	So now we have an annual average and can base our decisions
and projections for appreciation on numbers, rather than feelings.
This is a key point! Human beings who are not knowledgeable
31

about a topic tend to make decisions on an

changes. What should they have done? A

emotional level—and then to compound the

knowledgeable investor would have been

problem, they have what I refer to as “recency

researching markets for areas that were

bias.” Whatever is happening today, sure

under-valued prior to the drop in interest

feels as if it will always be happening. That

rates and lending qualifications. Then, the

is not a good place to make decisions from!

investor could target areas based upon his

Think about this for a few minutes—if real

or her knowledge of the upcoming baby-

estate is dramatically increasing in value at a

boomers who would be moving into certain

rapid rate, it sure feels as if you’d better jump

areas of the country when they retired. And

on the bandwagon and buy real estate in

finally, the investor would have worked

that area!

closely with professionals in that area and

This is what happened to many investors

found out how many homes were on the

between 2003 and 2006. The news came

market, how long listings were taking to

on at 6 p.m. and the announcer conveyed

move, and if any changes were taking place

the new NAR (National Association of

within the community to signal a change in

Realtors®) Quarterly appreciation rates for

expectations for that market.

the largest 125 cities in the country and

	So, a savvy investor in an under-valued

Bradenton/Sarasota, FL. was #1 in the

city like Bradenton, FL. would have been

nation! What did uneducated investors do?

buying property in 2002, 2003, and 2004,

They jumped on an airplane for Bradenton

but would have seen that prices were no

and bought four houses—and they had

longer in line with the economy of that city

no understanding of the above factors that

by early in 2004 and begun to sell before

influence demand on real estate in the long

things got out of control in terms of the price

term scheme of things!

of houses. Always remember, houses in any
city are there for people to actually live in

You’ve Got to Know When
to Hold—and When to Fold!

(what a concept)! If the average person
does not make enough to live in a house
or apartment (either buy or rent), there are
going to be vacancies! Real estate is like a

32

What was wrong with that picture? They

finely tuned instrument—it will self-correct or

bought AFTER the market had emerged

“retune” itself whenever the prices get too

and grown—not before or during the

far out of line with the economy of the area.

Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation

The educated and knowledgeable investor would have been selling
by 2004 and 2005—not buying! And, the people he or she would
have been selling to would, in large part, have been the people
who were buying airplane tickets and flying into the area to buy
property that they didn’t have the correct knowledge to buy.

what this means to you

At this point you might ask yourself, “How do I find undervalued areas
to invest in? How do I evaluate where those areas are in terms of the
market cycle?” One of the best things you can do as you begin your
real estate investing business is have a mentor to guide you through
the process. He or she will know and understand the intricacies of
investing and market analysis. As well, your mentor will work with you
to identify new market trends that are taking place in the area under
investigation, the number of days on market, the sub-areas within the
overall city that are most likely to appreciate the most quickly, and
those that are most likely to stall and begin self-correcting first.
	Now, in a market that is already stalled, where do investors
begin? Start by identifying the sub-neighborhoods that are moving
the most quickly! Working with your real estate professional, do a zip
code search for the areas that have the properties that are moving
with the most frequency. And then, begin looking for distressed sellers
that are highly motivated to sell in those zip codes. If one of your
streams of income is going to be foreclosures, you could target all
sellers within a certain zip code who are in pre-foreclosure status.
If one of your investment strategies is to buy and hold using lease
option techniques, you could then buy the pre-foreclosure, hold it for
three years using a lease option technique, and realize the benefits
of the appreciation that the city’s otherwise stalled market is not
experiencing.

33

The key concept in this chapter is for

Self-Correcting Markets: Areas

new investors to understand the magnitude

that have either gone up too quickly

of analyzing a real estate market prior to

or too much due to dabblers investing

buying property. If you are buying in a

and creating artificial demand that was

stalled real estate area, and you understand

not filled by actual long term buyers or

that from the beginning, you will know to

tenants, or areas that are undervalued

buy at a large discount to cover and build in

that need to adjust upward to change

the lack of appreciation that you understand

the pricing for that physical

is going to be a part of that deal.

proximity to nearby, higher priced areas.

location’s

	If you know where you are in a market
cycle, you can buy, hold, or sell accordingly,

Depreciating Markets: Areas where

as well as change or modify your exit

industry, manufacturing, or tourism has

strategy to complement the part of the cycle

declined, decreasing the demand on

you are in. The cycles or conditions of a real

the existing available housing and new

market are as follows:

structures or sources of revenue are not
yet in place to create a new demand.

Appreciating Markets: Areas where
there is not enough housing, high demand,

Based upon these definitions and categories

or a shortage of land. Areas where an

of markets, where would you categorize

increase in population is placing pressure

your city, overall?

on the housing market. Neighborhoods

Many new investors, as they evaluate

that are in high demand due to location,

their local markets, believe that property is

school districts, or other influences are

depreciating when it is actually self-correcting.

cause the area to be considered “choice.”

As well, they buy based upon price, rather
than buying based upon market potential.

Flat Markets: Areas that have an

Most new investors lean towards buying in

adequate amount of housing for the

the low or middle income areas because they

population and housing demands. Areas

feel the risk is lower. However, when market

that have an abundance of land for future

analysis is a part of your knowledge base,

development and few restrictions on

buying decisions are made based upon exit

building new houses.

and holding strategies, not on fear of risk
(bigger numbers).

34

chapter
three

35

Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market

getting to
know your
market
A

s we learned in the previous

may have heard people say it before:

chapter, real estate investors

you make your money when you buy;

must know how to analyze an overall

you just realize it when you sell your

market to determine what is happening

property and make a profit, or when

within it at any given time. In addition,

you start getting positive cash flow

they must use their knowledge to identify

from an income-producing property.

the most profitable neighborhoods

And it’s true. So, it’s imperative you

within that market for their various

buy right, meaning you never pay too

streams of income. Now, with that

much for a property.

knowledge we can begin to look at

To do this, you need to get to

ways to make wise buying decisions

know and understand the market

in the right places.

you’re buying in. After all, the only

The most important thing you will

way you can calculate the after-repair

do in real estate investing is buy right

value of a property is by knowing the

(in other words, make the best deal

fair market value of houses in the area

possible when buying a property).

you choose to concentrate in. It is a

This is where you will really make

crucial part of the evaluation process.

your money in real estate. In fact, you
37

TRUE MARKET VALUE

DEFINING THE AREA
YOU WILL INVEST IN

Some people think the true market value is
what they see advertised in the classified

Start by looking in a low- to moderate-income

section of the newspaper or in flyers they

neighborhood, where you will find a large

have pulled out of a box on a real estate

inventory of properties. If you want to buy,

agent’s sign. But that is a “wish list” – what

fix, and sell, look for decent neighborhoods

the seller hopes to get. The true market value

where it is clear neighbors care about their

is not what people are asking for. It is what

property and the community (these are often

someone is willing to pay and someone else

termed “We Care” neighborhoods).

is willing to accept. And more specifically,

	If you want to wholesale properties

it is the sales prices of houses that have sold

(quick-turn properties to other investors – a

within the last six months (not what they were

popular and profitable strategy you will

listed for, but what they actually sold for).

learn about in greater detail later), you will

	No matter what type of real estate

be looking more toward extremely distressed

investing you do (buy, fix, and sell;

properties or neighborhoods.

wholesale; foreclosure; lease option; income

	Of course, in order to define your target

property; etc.), you will need to understand

area in relation to your goals, you need to

your market. Understanding your market

know where each of these areas is in your

will help you know what to offer, how to

city. If you are not sure where these areas

recognize a good deal when you see one,

are, you will need to segment your city with

and how to act quickly. And as you develop

the help of your real estate agent. If you do

your knowledge of the market, you will be

not already have a real estate professional

spending less time looking at properties that

or need to know what to look for in a good

aren’t worthwhile investments.

real estate agent, please refer to Chapter
Two.

38

Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market

segmenting your area

Ask the real estate professional what the average price of a three
bedroom, two bath, single family home is in your city. You also want
the agent to pull up a one-line MLS (multiple listing service) list of
single family homes. Sometimes they call this a “short form.” Have the
agent start at $0 and go to 120% of the average home price.
With this information, you can now identify which areas are
low-income, working class, middle-income, and higher-income
neighborhoods. Next, take the average price of a home in your
city and multiply it by 70% and by 110%.
For example:
$100,000

= average price

70% 		

= $70,000

110% 		

= $110,000

EXAMPLE
Below 70% of
Average

70% of
Average

Low Income
Working Class
Neighborhood Neighborhood

$70,000

$70,000

Average
Home Price

110% of Average

110%+ of
Average

Working Class
Neighborhood

Middle Income
Neighborhood

$100,000 $110,000

$110,000

Once you have this information, you will need to get a map of your
city, which you can usually obtain directly from your city, purchase
from a store, or find on the Internet. You will need to make at least
two copies of this map. Have one copy enlarged to a size that
allows you to easily see the streets and get this copy laminated. If
you live in a large city, begin by concentrating on about a one-mile
square area or on a 20 to 40-block square; you can gradually
expand your area.

39

The second map should be on an

neighborhoods

8 ½ x 11 inch sheet of paper that you can

wholesaling opportunities. If you don’t know

put in a notebook and carry with you in the

where these areas are, talk to someone who

car (you may need to use several sheets,

is knowledgeable about your area. You can

depending on the size of your city). Write

contact property management companies,

on the map where the low-income, working

appraisers, postal carriers, cable workers,

class, and the middle-income areas are

or your local police.
These

based upon the information you received
from the agent. Identify extremely distressed

more

maps

will

appropriate

also

help

Apartments
Wholesale

PreForeclosures

Commercial Office
Space

40

My City

Wholesale
Wholesale

Pre-Foreclosure Dovetailed
With
Buy & Hold
Lease Options

you

understand what homes are selling for in
different segments of your city.

Lease
Options

for

Rehab
Potential:
Revitalization Areas:
Historic Grant &
Tax Credits
Apartments
Land
Development

Mobile
Home Lease
Options

Lease
Options

Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market

	As you become more familiar with real estate investing and
the skills needed for the streams of income you will focus on, this
map will become more valuable to you as time passes. Now, when
you are searching the MLS list for various properties that are for
sale, you can do specific searches of zip codes or neighborhoods
when you are ready to go after your next lease option, foreclosure,
wholesale, or rehab property.

decide what area you want to focus on

As discussed before, pick an area you want to focus on. Your target
area will depend on what kind of investing you want to do. For
example, if you plan to buy a house, fix it up, and then resell it, you
will be looking in the working to middle-income areas. If you want
to do quick-turns without ever fixing up the property, you’ll look in
areas that are more distressed—areas that the rehabbers tend to
work in. If you are not sure which area to target, then start with the
working to middle-income neighborhoods. You can always expand
to other areas.
	Once you have completed this assignment, you will be able to
go into another region, anywhere in the country, and get to know
the market there quickly.

determining property values using comps

Now that you have picked your target area, you are ready to get to
know the market. You will now ask the real estate agent to pull up the
comps (nickname for comparables) within a certain neighborhood.
What you will get is a list of properties that have sold within the
41

last six months in the particular area where

	If you are buying rental properties, the

you are focusing your investing. The reason

appraiser will use an income approach.

you need the agent to do this is because

The value of the property is based upon the

the comps help you understand the market.

income it produces. This method is used in

Earlier, we mentioned some people think the

determining the value of multi-units.

true market is what they see in the houses for

	Have the real estate agent pull up a

sale section of the newspaper. But the true

list of houses that have sold within the last

market is what someone is willing to pay

six months in the area you are focusing on.

and someone else is willing to accept in a

Ask the agent to pull up about 20 houses.

competitive and open market.

If 20 houses haven’t sold, that’s okay. You

Real estate appraisers use the sales

can’t make more houses sell than have sold.

comparison approach to identify properties

On the other hand, if the agent pulls up 40

that have recently sold that are similar in

houses, that’s too many. Ask your agent to

square footage, number of bedrooms,

condense the list down either by square

location, property type, available amenities,

footage, number of bedrooms, geography,

condition, etc. to the house they are

or style until you have 20 houses.

appraising. Appraisers will usually look at

Keep in mind that information about

three houses and determine the value of the

houses that have sold within the last three

house they are appraising based upon the

months is more valuable than the comps that

recent sales prices for those similar houses.

are six months old, since the market can

Appraisers also look at other methods to

change quickly.

determine the value of a property, such
as a cost replacement method. With this
method, they are comparing this house to
what it would cost per square foot to build

what the comparables
will tell you

a new one. This method is not as accurate
because supply and demand, as well as

Looking at the list of properties that have

the economics for an area determines what

sold within the last six months, you will see

people are willing to pay. You will find

information about each house, such as:

the appraised value leans heavily on the
comparables.
42

Listed price – This is the price the house
was listed for (the asking price).

Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market

Sold price – This is the price the house actually sold for.
Now you will know if the sellers got the price they were asking for
or less.
Days on the market, or DOM – The number of days listed
next to this tells you how many days the home stayed on the market
before it was sold. Sometimes you will just see a number indicating
the number of days it took to sell the property; other times, you may
see both a listed and a sold date. Either way, this provides valuable
information because it helps you understand the time it typically
takes to sell a house in your area.
Square footage – This tells you the size of the house. It also
helps you determine the cost per square foot that homes are selling
for (some comps will actually list the price per square foot).
How many bedrooms and baths
Lot size – It may tell you the dimensions of the lot or indicate what
percent of an acre the lot is (for example, .20 = one fifth of an
acre).
Year built or age of house – This will either tell you the year
the house was built or how old the house is.
This is the minimum information you should have on each of the
comps. However, you will probably see more because you are
going to ask the agent to include the remarks (or comments) and a
picture. The reason the remarks are so valuable is you will be trying
to figure out why these houses sold for the price they sold for. You
will be driving by each of them, but because they have been sold,
43

you will not be able to see inside. Since you
cannot judge a house by its cover any more
than you can judge a book by its cover,
the remarks will give you a clue as to the
condition of the house.

drive by the houses that
have sold
When you get your comparables list, you
need to drive by each of the houses on it.
Stop the car and look out the window. Write

Things you may see in the remark section of

down what you see. This is not a test to

the MLS include:

find something wrong with the property. The
house may look great! You are just trying to

• Great Fixer-Upper

figure out why the house sold for that price.

• Handyman Special
• Needs TLC

Start with the roof

• Sold As-Is

How does the roof look? You don’t have to
be a roofing expert to know it needs work

Reading this, you will know the house

if you see some missing shingles or shingles

probably needed some work even if it looks

that are curling up.

great on the outside.
Other things you may notice in the remarks
section are:

Look at the exterior of the house
How does it look? Does it need work?
Again, this is not a test to find what’s wrong
with the house. You have permission to write

• Motivated Seller

down, “House looks great.” But if you do

• Must Sell

notice something is wrong, then write it

• Foreclosure

down. Be sure to pay attention to the picture

• Bank Owned

on the MLS sheet. If the picture does not

• Illness Forces Sale

look as nice as the house does now, then

• Divorce

the person who bought the house probably

• Transferred

fixed it up.

When you see words like that, it could be
an indicator the seller is motivated.

Look at the yard
Now, check out the yard. How does it look?
Does it look groomed and taken care of?
Again, pay attention to the picture.

44

chapter
four

45

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

selecting
A Power team
I

n order to be successful, you will

The important thing to remember is

need to work with others… people

you don’t need to try to do all the

who know this business or can help

work yourself. Seek professional help

you build yours, people who can help

and support and recognize you will

direct you to buyers for your properties

need to learn to delegate certain

or provide financial assistance, etc.

responsibilities at some point.

	As an investor, you’ll learn how to

	You will find that putting your

leverage your money, but you will also

team together is an ongoing process.

need to learn how to leverage your

Your team will grow as you expand

time. Careful selection of qualified

your knowledge of real estate and

people who can assist you in growing

take advantage of additional income

your business can help you manage

streams and opportunities.

your time and energy more effectively.
And leveraging your team members’
knowledge can also help you avoid
making mistakes.

FINDING THE RIGHT REAL
estate professional

To help get you started, this
chapter will introduce you to the key

A good working relationship with a

contacts you will most likely have on

real estate professional is one of the

your power team.

most important assets an investor can
have. For one, when a property you
47

are interested in purchasing is listed with an
agent you will want to have your own agent
working with you to represent your best

choosing a REAL
estate professional

interests in the deal. Secondly, real estate
professionals can help you evaluate deals

When choosing an agent, you want

by pulling up sold properties comparable to

someone who works in the business full time

the one you are thinking of buying, giving

and has strong knowledge of his or her field.

you a good idea of the market value for that

You are looking an agent who is creative,

neighborhood. And third, Realtors® have

hard working, and aggressive, and who

access to the Multiple Listing Service (MLS)

knows how and where to find deals.

remarks section, a valuable source for finding

Most real estate professionals have

potential deals. The MLS is a cooperative

not worked with investors. They have never

exchange of listing information. When a

done a creative transaction. This can be

seller lists his or her home with a Realtor®,

a challenge for you and it can take some

the listing is put on the MLS, making the

time to find the right agent, but the time you

home available for any agent who belongs

spend will be well worth it. Since your agent

to the MLS to bring a buyer and share in the

is one of the most important, if not the most

commission with the listing agent.

important, member of your power team, he

The properties on the MLS will usually

48

or she cannot be your weakest link in your

include pictures and a good deal of

power team chain!

information about the property, including

	One of the most important things you

the address of the property, the number of

are looking for is an agent who thinks

bedrooms and baths, the square footage,

like you do—like a millionaire real estate

and available amenities. The MLS may also

wealth builder! Most agents are not

include any special terms the seller may

receptive to “unusual” offers. They may not

consider.

believe in “nothing down” offers or creative

	As we discussed in the previous chapter,

approaches. If you plan to make a creative

the remark section of the listing will contain

offer and you are working with an agent

clues about the condition of the property

who doesn’t think “outside the box,” it’s

and the motivation of the seller. Your agent

time to find a new one! In the meantime,

can put keywords into the remark section to

insist on being the one to present the offer

pull up properties of interest to you.

because you want the owner to hear the

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

benefits of your offer. Believing in those benefits will be key to making
a convincing presentation.
Tell the agent what you’re looking for—and be specific. If you
are beginning with wholesale deals, let the agent know you are
looking for distressed properties that need repair. Do not let the agent
pre-qualify you. Let them know you use private funding and can close
quickly.
	Find a real estate professional who works in your target area by
driving through the neighborhood. Look for agent signs and pick the
three companies with the most signs. As you do this, you may notice
an agent dominating the area. Real estate agents usually “farm” an
area, meaning they focus on a particular area and work it to get
listings. They do this by actively contacting the owners through phone
calls, mailing promotional material, and knocking on doors.
Begin your interview by saying, “We are real estate investors and
we’re buying houses in this area. We are looking for properties
that are 20-30% below market and/or distressed properties
in need of repair. We also look mainly for properties in need
of cosmetic repairs. We are also looking for an agent who
specializes in income properties such as apartment buildings,
duplexes, and four-plexes. Is there someone in your office who
fits that description?”

Not Too Big, Not Too Small, Just Right!
One of the questions new investors have when it comes to choosing
the right person to work with is, “How much experience should
the agent have?” There is no one size fits all answer to this, but
experience has shown me that somewhere between three and five
years seems to be a good blend of knowledge about the business
and not being too set in their ways.

49

REAL estate professional
interview script

by and present offers on properties that I’m
interested in.
This will be a good opportunity for
both of us to make some money. Are you

The following is a sample script of what
you might say when interviewing potential
agents.
“Hello, my name is _______________. I’m

able to help me out?”
•	How long have you been in the real
estate business? (You want a minimum
of one year of experience.)

in a position to do some investing in real
estate. I am looking to buy properties in your

•	Do you specialize in any type of real

area and I want to develop a relationship

estate?

(Their

specialty

should

with someone who understands my needs.

preferably be your area of interest.)

I’m looking for any property that
makes sense. I will consider everything:

•	Do you specialize in any area of town?

single family, and multi-units with a good
cash flow. I’m interested in properties that
are cosmetically distressed. Fixer-uppers

•	Do you have any satisfied customers I
can talk to?

are great. You know, paint, carpet, and a
little cleanup, that sort of thing. I am not
looking for any major repairs like plumbing

•	Do you make real estate your living?
(Answer should be yes!)

or structural.
I can pay cash in some instances.
Generally I use private funding to purchase

•	Are you willing to put the time in to
help me find the right properties?

these houses and can close quickly (they
think commission!). However, I am always
interested in seller financing.
I am looking for an agent who will

• What

neighborhoods

are

turning

around properties more quickly than
others?

research the MLS for me to find properties

50

that meet my criteria and fax or email me

•	Do you have any banking connections?

a copy of those listings. I will do a drive-

(Mortgage brokers, lenders, etc.)

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

• Can you recommend a good closing agent in town?
•	How much is your commission?
•	Do you have the flexibility to work with your broker?
•	Is this a good time to buy? Why?
• What is your opinion of the direction the real estate market is
headed?
• What are the average number of days on market in ________
zip code?
•	Do you own any real estate in town? (You want this answer to
be yes.)
•	Have you ever owned investment property?
•	Are there any areas you feel particularly good about? If so,
why?
• Where would you invest if you were going to buy property
yourself?
• What kind of properties would you buy?
•	Does your firm manage properties? If yes, what do you
charge?
• What is the vacancy rate in the area?
51

•	How many properties do you have
listed? (This is just to give you an idea
of whether this agent works primarily

finding the right
mortgage broker

as a buyer’s or a seller’s agent.)
•	How many properties did you sell last
year? (You want to see how busy they
are.)

estate investor’s best friend. You want a
broker who can put the deal together and
get it closed.

•	Do you work with investors? If so, how
many

A good mortgage broker can be the real

are

you

actively

seeking

properties for, right now?
•	Are you available on the weekends?
•	Do you have any properties for sale
that would be a good investment for
me?
•	Are there areas that seem to be going
up in value faster than others? If they
answer yes to this question, ask more
questions—such as what is driving that
market, why the demand is higher in
this area, etc.

	Sometimes you have to go through
several brokers until you find the one you
want to work with, but remember that it
never hurts to have more than one contact.
In fact, we suggest that you have not one,
but THREE, mortgage brokers on your team.
Why? This keeps them on their toes and
provides you with more loan products to
choose from.
	You are looking for a broker who has
been in the business a while. You want one
who is experienced in working with investors
and bridge financing (hard money lenders).
And you want one who is thoroughly
familiar with FHA financing, local down
payment assistance programs, grants, and
hard money lending.
	A mortgage broker can be a good
source for finding investment deals and is
usually more creative than a banker when it
comes to funding your opportunities.

52

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

When you talk with mortgage brokers, do not let them run a
credit check until you find a mortgage broker you like. Every time
they run a credit check, it can lower your score, so don’t authorize
a pre-approval credit check. The best way to find a good mortgage
broker is often through a real estate professional. Interview at least
five mortgage brokers before choosing the ones you will eventually
work with.
	Another good question to ask potential brokers is how they
are creatively dealing with the tight lending policies in place at the
present time. Find out what they will need you to have in terms of
credit scores, down payments, and other qualifications in order to
get deals closed.

mortgage broker interview
Ask the following questions to help determine if this is the right
mortgage broker for your team.
•	Is the major part of your business refinancing? (Anyone can
do refinance. This is not what you are looking for.)
•	How long have you been a mortgage broker? (You want at
least three years experience. It takes experience to know a
lot of different lenders and products, and the mortgage
industry is constantly changing.)
•	Do you work with investors?
•	Do you lend on appraised value or purchase price? (Will
they lend on the after-repair value?)

53

who had good credit but couldn’t
• Can you put together 100% financing
packages?

qualify because of employment history
or down payment amounts? Would
you be willing to refer those people

•	Do you have access to hard money?

to me for possible lease option deals
and then I would send them back

•	Do you specialize in the nonconforming arena?

to you when they have improved their
scores (or whatever else caused them
to be ineligible) for funding at that

•	Are you a correspondent lender? (A

time?

correspondent lender can lend money
for 90 days until lenders complete
their funding. They help ensure you

community banker

won’t lose a deal because of last
minute problems with the lender’s

Your contact at the bank should be someone

underwriting team. Correspondent

at the vice president level or another

lenders get the job done by lending

executive with lending authority. Take time

the money themselves.)

to interview several bankers until you find
someone you would like to work with.

•	Do you have the ability to fund your

There are several benefits to using a

own loans? (If they are not familiar

community bank. First, they have local

with the term “correspondent lender.”)

knowledge of the area and know the
growth pattern of the community first-hand.

• Would you help me put the deals

Second, they have local decision making

together? (The mortgage broker can

ability (decisions are not being made in

put the deal together for you.)

some other state where the person doesn’t
know your real estate market’s potential or

54

•	Do you have names on file of people

the trends of your market). Third, they offer

who wanted to purchase a home,

flexibility and are able to be more creative

were qualified in terms of a down

than the larger banks. And fourth, they want

payment, but fell short due to their

to build relationships. Finally, and far from

credit scores? How about people

the least important point, they often make

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

what are referred to as LTV loans—loans based upon the value of
the property, rather than the amount of the contract and appraisal
combined. What does this mean? If you are buying at 70% of
FMV, and the appraisal on the house is $100,000, an LTV lender
will lend the full amount (and sometimes even more). A conventional
lender through your mortgage broker will typically lend a maximum
of 80% of the contract price or 80% of the appraisal, whichever
gives them the most secure position! Community banks are known
for providing great service and will usually tell you why you were
turned down if a loan is rejected and work with you to help you
overcome that hurdle. They want you to stay with them a long time.
Realize that building a solid relationship with the right banker
takes time, but the effort is worth it.

contractor handyman

A contractor or handyman can perform the necessary repairs on your
properties (investors generally prefer working with a handyman).
It is critical that the person or persons you use are licensed and
insured to protect you and them. You need to find someone you
can trust, and someone who can give you bids and manage the
subcontractors.
	You can find contacts for the services you need through your
local home improvement store’s bulletin board or get a referral from
other investors or individuals you know who have had experience
working with contractors or handymen. Another good way to find
handymen is through internet sites, including internet referral sites.

55

tax professional

lawyer

An accountant or CPA can help you take

Your lawyer must be in full-time real estate,

advantage of any available deductions

mortgage, and corporate law. You want

from the ownership of real estate and can

someone who is able to review documents

help you stay on top of your taxes as a

and contracts, and is familiar with rent

self-employed individual. You need to find

review and tenant’s protection legislation.

one who understands what you are doing

You also want an attorney who is aggressive

and what you are planning to do. And

in asset protection. You don’t want to amass

they should be knowledgeable about real

a fortune and then lose it because of a

estate and tax law, as well as the impact

lawsuit. An attorney can also be a great

of income taxes and capital gains on what

resource for finding deals.

you plan to do. They should also understand
corporations and what will help you achieve
your financial goals.

appraiser

Title company

If you invest in a state where title companies
are used, you’ll find that a title company can
provide you with many beneficial services.

Appraisers are hired to determine the market

For example, they can provide property

value of homes when necessary and can

reports on properties you are thinking of

help with “Rent to Own” and “Sweat Equity”

buying. And they can give you information

programs. You want to find an appraiser who

about owners of homes in an area you

will do “subject to” repairs, and who is FHA

are “farming.” Title companies can also

approved. Appraisers know what needs to

handle closings and provide title insurance

be done to qualify for FHA and they know

to protect you. Sometimes, they are able to

how to bring a property to code. You can

pull up pre-foreclosure lists for you. Another

learn a great deal from your appraiser.

advantage of working with a title company
is they usually know plenty of investors.
Ask them to alert you when deals don’t go

56

through.

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

home inspection professional

Develop a relationship with a home inspection professional. Be
sure to accompany the inspector as he or she inspects the house
and ask a lot of questions. Use a property manager or a real estate
professional to help you find a good one.

surveyor

These professionals will survey the land. A land survey is sometimes
necessary to close on the backend.

termite inspectors

Termite inspectors are sometimes necessary for closing and they can
alert you to expensive hidden problems. Use a large established
company. If the property is treated or was treated within the last
year, make sure there is a contract and that it is renewable.

insurance agent

An insurance agent can be a great resource in helping you decide
the best coverage for your various properties and may be able
to direct you to potential deals. Look for an insurance agent who
specializes in working with investors.

57

property manager

mentor

If you are buying income properties and

Model yourself after people who impress

don’t want to manage them, property

you. You will learn much from someone

managers will be vital to your business. You

“who has been there” before you. Follow

can learn a lot from property managers, such

the approach of people who have proven

as the vacancy rate for the area and what

themselves in this business. A mentor could

the going rent is. Sometimes they will alert

also be a potential investor for you.

you when an investor they are managing
properties for is thinking of selling. They may
also be able to give you a referral for a

networking contacts

good handyman.
Network with everyone you know and meet.

Government grant
and loan specialist

Hand out business cards whenever possible
because leads can come from some of the
most unlikely places (for example, stick them
inside the envelopes when you pay your bills

A government grant and loan specialist can

or leave them with your tip for a waitress).

assist you in finding grants and loans that

	Attend industry-related events such as

will help you in your real estate investing.

foreclosure auctions to meet and get to know

You can find them by contacting government

other investors and communicate regularly

agencies or by calling several banks in your

with the members of your power team.

area. You may also want to talk to other

	And definitely do not miss out on

investors to see what they know and to get

attending meetings of your local real estate

referrals.

investment club if you have one (if you don’t,
then consider creating one!). Most real
estate investment clubs have a guest speaker
and meet once a month. If you have trouble
finding a creative lender or another member
of your power team, you may get a great

58

Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team

referral from a club member. And you can usually find hard money
lenders at the meetings.
Check with other investors, title companies, real estate professionals,
mortgage brokers, or anyone who is in the real estate business about
an investment club in your area. They may charge a monthly or yearly
fee for membership. Ask if you can go free on a complimentary visit
the first time you attend.

assignment

The following is a suggested assignment.
Begin building your power team.
Start by building relationships with a real estate professional, a
mortgage broker, and a banker. They are critical to your success in
real estate investing.

59

60

chapter
five

61

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

finding
motivated
sellers
B

y now you should know how to
figure out the true value of a

property by using the comps you can

WHAT IS A
MOTIVATED SELLER?

get from a real estate professional.
You should have started building your

Motivated sellers are real estate

power team and are now eager to find

owners who have to sell for one reason

a deal. You are ready to make money!

or another. There are many factors that

We talked about how you make

affect their motivation to sell and these

your money when you buy and the

factors fall into three main categories:

importance of buying right. Buying

personal hardship, the property itself,

right would mean getting a great

or economic problems.

deal to maximize your profit on the

What kind of personal hardships

backend.

may cause a homeowner to become a

	Ultimately, you are going to find

motivated seller? For one, an owner’s

what creates a great deal is finding

failing health may cause him to need to

a motivated or flexible seller. In fact,

sell the house. Or perhaps the owner

locating motivated sellers and helping

has a job out of state and the house

them with their problems is the secret

is vacant; as time passes, that owner

to great deals.
63

will likely become more flexible on price or
terms. Maybe the seller has suffered a job

how do we find them?

loss and the house is going into foreclosure.
Or maybe divorce is forcing a sale. Perhaps
the owner died and the house needs to be
sold to settle the estate and pay the heirs. Or
a partnership has fallen through, causing the
need to sell.
The property’s condition may create
a need to sell as well. Perhaps the owner
doesn’t have enough money to fix it up.
Sometimes a property may have financing

Regardless of the factors that create the
need to sell, the point is there are many
motivated sellers out there and many ways
to find them. In doing so, you can locate a
great deal.
This chapter offers some techniques
you will find helpful in locating flexible
sellers in your area.

that has a balloon payment due and the

Work with Real estate

owner can’t refinance it because the property

professionals

isn’t in sufficient condition to qualify for a

We talked about the importance of having

loan. Or you may find a tired landlord with

a good real estate agent as a member of

a house that was trashed by the tenants.

your power team and that it may take some

	Economic problems can create a need

time to find the right one. In fact, you may

to sell as well. But remember, some economic

have to try several of them out first before

problems you may encounter can be caused

you find the right agent or agents for you,

by a change in the economy overall, not

but that’s okay. Once you find just a couple

just in the economics of the homeowner. For

of agents who have the ability to locate

example, a business that employs most of

deals and who will work hard for you, your

the town, but then goes out of business, will

phone and fax will begin ringing.

have an impact on real estate in the area.

Working with real estate agents is

Be careful! You may find phenomenal deals,

usually the best way to locate good deals

but are they really great deals if you can’t

and motivated sellers when you first start out

sell the properties or rent them out?

with real estate investing. Look for the ones
who know how to be creative and who
specialize in working with investors.

64

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

Working with more than one agent
Most investors have more than one agent they work with because it
can be very beneficial to have different agents on your power team.
A listing agent, for example, can hold off putting the property on the
MLS for a couple of days so an investor has less competition for his
or her offer. When you work with an agent who has pocket listings,
they may give you first shot at making an offer on a property before
they put it on the MLS.
	Another type of real estate professional you may find good
to work with is a foreclosure specialist. There are banks that work
specifically with certain agents in listing their foreclosures. Even
though not every foreclosure is a deal, some are worth checking out.
	Another real estate professional you may want to work with
would be a “hoop jumper” – an agent who is aggressive and works
hard for you as a buyer. They will put keywords into the MLS and pull
up comps for you.
	No matter how many agents you work with, you need to
keep one thing in mind: be loyal. If you receive information from
one agent and then buy through another agent, you cannot expect
that first agent to keep looking for properties for you. Real estate
agents have to eat, too. Always buy from the one who gives you the
information first. Be loyal to that agent and always create a win/
win situation for both of you.
	Additionally, some investors try to go around the agent to
avoid paying their fees. But this doesn’t make good business or
moral sense. You need to treat the agent who generates good
leads right by rewarding them and not trying to take away their
commission.
	Since you will be working with more than one agent, you need
to understand that it may be a concern to an agent that he or she
will bring you a property, only to have you go directly to the owner
65

or work with another agent. To alleviate this

• Divorce

concern, you could offer to sign a Buyer’s

• Illness

Broker Agreement. In the agreement, you

• Transferred

state you will work with only this agent on

• Foreclosure

the particular property he brought to you for

• Condemned

a specific period of time. This protects the

• Bank Owned

agent and keeps him working hard to locate

• Desperate

deals for you.

• Estate Sale

Using keywords

• Moving

	As we’ve mentioned previously, the

•	Seller Will Finance

real estate professional can put keywords

• Will Sacrifice

into the remark section of the MLS to find
some interesting properties that meet your

Expired or “aged” listings

requirements. For example, the agent can

Once you have a good relationship with a

put in the word “motivated” and the computer

agent, you can ask him or her to pull up

will give a listing of every property that has

the expired listings or the listings that have

the word “motivated” in it.

been on the market for a while. Sometimes
the MLS system will allow your agent to find

Keywords you will want the agent to search

properties that are free and clear.

for include:
• Handyman Special
• Investor Special
• Needs Work
• Offer
• Must Sell
• Needs TLC
• As-Is Condition
• Fixer-Upper
• Motivated

66

Create a flyer to attract
aggressive agents
If you want to attract agents who may
already have motivated sellers or who know
of interesting properties, you may want to
run an ad or send a flyer to all the real estate
offices in your area of interest.
A sample of what your flyer might look like
can be found on the next page.

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

HOW TO
INCREASE YOUR SALES!
Attention: Broker and Real Estate Office Managers!
If you want to MAKE MORE MONEY,
then make a copy of this EXCITING OPPORTUNITY
for each of your agents or please post on your board.

WE NEED To BUY HOUSES AND
MULTI-FAMILY UNITS NOW!
WE’LL PAY UP TO 60% OF VALUE WITH CASH,
OR MORE WITH TERMS! ANY AREA OR CONDITION

$500 BONUS!
Call us with your properties to sell or sell our properties to your customers and
get a $500 BONUS on top of your commissions!
WE HAVE THE EXPERIENCE TO BE SUCCESSFUL
WE’RE FLEXIBLE, CREATIVE, AND GOOD AT SOLVING
PROBLEMS...
We have a WIN/WIN Philosophy! Call me today!
Joe Smith, 555-1212

67

phone number. Most neighbors realize this
FSBO (For Sale By Owner) Signs

vacant house is bringing down the value

By now, you are probably already taking

of their home and will be anxious to help

a different route to work every day. You

you locate the owner. If they seem to know

should be paying attention to any FSBO

how to reach the owner, but are hesitant to

signs you see, especially because some

give you this information, just give them your

of these properties may not even be listed

business card and ask them to let the owner

in the newspaper and the only way to

know you may be interested in purchasing

know about them is from the signs. Poorly

the property.

advertised FSBO homes are an excellent

	Leave several flyers at the vacant

source of leads (think less competition for

house. The owner or a family member often

your offer!). Write down the phone number

checks on the house.

and call the owner. Better yet, get out of the
car and knock on the door.

How to find the owners of
vacant houses

Tracking Vacant or
Boarded Houses

•	Look up the owner’s name in tax rolls,

Whenever you are in the car, you should

appraisal districts, or computerized

be looking for vacant houses, distressed

services. Or check online at:

properties, FSBOs, and houses for rent. Drive

netronline.com. Click on public

up and down your target area regularly and

records, then your county and state.

seek out these types of properties. Owners

	Look for the assessor or auditor’s office.

of vacant or distressed properties can be

Many times this information is on the

motivated sellers.

	Internet.

Write down or tape record the
addresses of any vacant or distressed homes

• Check with the neighbors on both

you find. You can look up the owner’s name

sides of the house and see if they know

at the courthouse. If you have time, stop

how to reach the owners or where they

the car, get out, and knock on neighbors’

have moved.

doors. They may know where the owner
has moved to or they may have the owner’s
68

•	Send two letters, one to the address

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

of

the

vacant

house

asking

it

to

be

forwarded, and the other one to the address with the words
“Address Service Requested – Do Not Forward” on the
envelope.
• Check with the utility company to see if a new account is open
in the previous owner’s name.
• Check the phone book or call Information to see if a new
phone number has been issued to the owner or if they have a
new address.
If you have a different mailing address for the owner, but it isn’t
listed in the phone book, check a reverse directory, which can be
found in the reference section of your public library. The directory
starts with addresses first, allowing you to search for the owner’s
name when the only information you have is their address. Or go
to reverseaddress.com. Sometimes the owner may be living with
relatives with a different last name and reverse directories can help
you find them.
•	Employ a private investigator (look in the phone book under
Private Investigator) to have them do a skip trace to find
the owner. Try to negotiate with them that they must find the
information you are looking for or there is no fee.
Auctions
Look in the Yellow Pages and in newspaper advertisements for
auctioneers. Call every auctioneer you find and ask them if they
auction real estate. If they say yes, ask to be put on their mailing
list. If you see an auction for real estate property being advertised
69

or if you receive a notice in the mail from
an auctioneer, call and get the address
of the property. Drive by the house. If you
like the house, make an offer for them to
submit before the auction takes place (if the
property is bank owned, the bank will wait

properties to.
HUD, VA, FDIC, IRS, and others
In some areas of the country, HUD (Department
of Housing and Urban Development) and VA
(Department of Veteran’s Affairs) foreclosure

for the auction to make the sale).

properties are phenomenal deals. In other

Absolute auctions

not a deal. To find foreclosure properties

There are ABSOLUTE auctions. An absolute

offered by HUD, VA, and others, such as

auction means they will take whatever is

the FDIC, the IRS, and Customs, visit the

bid. Banks typically have 14 months to sell

HUD website at www.hud.gov/homes/

an REO (Real Estate Owned); if it is not

homesforsale.cfm. HUD and VA foreclosure

sold by then, they have to quickly unload

bids have to be submitted through a HUD-

the property. You usually have to enroll to

certified agent/broker.

be able to bid. Get signed up and get a

areas, people pay too much and they are

bidder’s card.

Important Note: Never bid on an owner

Foreclosure auctions

property. If you are not going to live in the

Go to a foreclosure auction. If you plan

property, you need to wait until it appears

to buy at this auction, be sure to do your

on the list that is open to all bidders.

occupied list unless you plan to live in the

due diligence first. You will also probably
need cash. There will be lots of competition.

Garage Sales

This is also a good place to find investors

When you see a garage or a yard sale,

to network with. Go there to meet other

get out of your car and talk to the owners.

investors you can buy from or quick-turn

Remember what most people do before they
put their house up for sale? They de-junk!
Someone having a garage sale may be
getting ready to sell his or her home. But
even if they are not planning on selling, they

70

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

may know of someone else who is. You will usually find them to
be friendly and talkative. Talk to them about the neighborhood. Do
they know what houses sell for? Do they know of anyone thinking of
selling? Give them your business card.
Courthouse Records
The courthouse is an excellent source for researching and finding
motivated sellers. Get to know where the records are kept in your
county courthouse. Sometimes you may be going into different areas
of the courthouse depending on what you are researching. Look for:
Foreclosures
	Foreclosure will inevitably create motivation. As mentioned
before, foreclosure doesn’t always mean a good deal, but some
foreclosure properties are great deals! When working a foreclosure,
there are four timeframes that provide profitable opportunities. They
will be discussed in greater detail in the chapter on foreclosures.
Private note holders
Many private note holders are investors. They may own several
properties or they may be hard moneylenders. Obviously, not all
private note holders are investors. But if you see a private note
holder with several notes, then you’ve probably found an investor. A
private note holder can become a very motivated seller if they have
to foreclose on a property they hold.
Divorce cases
Divorce is a primary cause of foreclosure. Even if a couple does not
lose their house to foreclosure, divorce can cause great financial
hardship and motivate the couple to sell. You must have full disclosure
with both sellers jointly signing any agreement.

71

there is a will, there can also be great deals
Out-of-state owners

if the heirs and beneficiaries are just looking

If you can find an out-of-state owner, you

to liquidate assets so they can disperse an

may find a more flexible seller. It can be

inheritance. This can be a huge opportunity

a hassle to manage a property from a

for an investor, especially when heirs live

distance. Or sometimes the owner had to

out of town. The heirs may not want the

move quickly and now the house is sitting

property or they may not be able to afford it.

vacant. Sometimes a title company will have

Many times, the family tells the executor of

the ability to pull this information up for you

the estate to just get rid of the property and

from the county records.

the heirs are often willing to take a large

Houses with tax liens
When an owner is having trouble paying
their taxes, it is usually a sign they are
having financial difficulty. Often, there is a
lot of equity in the home and you could help
solve their problem and make it a win/win
situation.

discount on it. And sometimes the executor
has to sell the property to pay off debts and
taxes. Contact the executor of the will. You
can find contact information in the county
recorder’s office or in public notices in the
legal section of your newspaper.
Bankruptcies
You can find information about bankruptcies

Lis Pendens

in legal papers or at the bankruptcy court.

Lis Pendens is Latin for “suit pending,”

The name of the trustee who has been

referring to a court action. In some states, it

appointed to handle the case will appear

is the beginning stage of foreclosure.

in the papers and the notice should tell if

Probate sales and estate sales
With probate and estate sales, property can
be purchased from the estate of an individual
who has passed away. Sometimes good
deals can be found in circumstances where

72

real estate is involved. The trustee will give
you the information if you call. Creditors
will usually take huge discounts. Even if the
bankruptcy has been recently filed and is not
closed, the court can release the property.

there is no will or known heirs and the state

Eviction filings

is liquidating the estate’s assets. However, if

Go to your county courthouse and ask the

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

clerk where to find the department to file an eviction complaint.
A landlord can become a motivated seller after going through
an eviction and may welcome an offer from an investor who is
providing a way out of ever having to go through one again.
Local Newspapers
You should be checking the classified section of your local newspaper
on a daily or almost daily basis. Nationwide, the classified ads are
filled with real estate properties for sale. A small percentage of
these ads are placed by owners who are slightly motivated to sell.
An even smaller percentage only 1 to 2%) of the ads are placed by
sellers who are desperate and intensely motivated. These are the
sellers you want to talk to.
	In the beginning, you may think there are no motivated sellers
in your area, but be persistent and keep calling. Most investors
check a few ads and then give up. Don’t let that be you! Make the
effort and reap the benefits.
	You should also “grade” the ads, looking for motivated sellers
by using the keywords mentioned throughout this manual. Start by
circling or highlighting any word that might indicate a motivated
seller, a distressed property, or special financing terms, such as
“must sell,” “will look at all offers,” “investor special,” “needs TLC,”
“rent to own,” “owner finance,” “no qualifying,” or “take over
payments.” The ads with your target keywords can be your “A”
list, your top picks to call first. Call all the FSBO ads that depict the
keywords showing that either the property or the owner is distressed
or that there may be creative financing available.
	You’ll soon find that your search for good leads is much more
effective when you know exactly what you are looking for.

73

Place a “goldmine” ad

these could be great places for your ad

In addition to being a source of finding

in the same sections listed above. When

houses for sale, newspapers can be a way of

people are desperate to sell, they will often

generating deals when savvy investors place

look in the small newspapers. (We have

their own ads in the paper. Getting the seller

also provided other sample ads for you

to call you is extremely important. This can

throughout this manual.)

save you time and give you a good deal.
An example of a goldmine ad follows:

Use legal newspapers
Legal newspapers are another way to
find motivated sellers, as people who are

Private investor
looking to buy
income properties.
Will look at all,
any condition.

Can pay cash

555-1212

struggling with bankruptcy, foreclosure,
divorce, etc. will be in the legal notices. See
if your local library has a copy or ask how
you can find the legal newspaper by talking
to title companies, attorneys, and banks.
When you find the legal notices,
you may want to contact these potentially
motivated sellers with a simple letter. Your
letter might read like the following:
	I understand you have recently gone
through some difficult circumstances in your
life and may be interested in selling your
home. If you are interested, please call me
at 555-1212.

74

As a buyer, you want to get the seller to

People who are having difficulties will

call you! You can place these ads in the

often look in the legal publication to see

Real Estate Wanted section or in the Houses

if their notice is in the paper, so consider

For Sale section of your local newspaper

running an ad in a legal publication. You

and real estate magazines. Additionally,

may find attorneys will also start calling,

if your town has a “Thrifty Nickel,” “Penny

asking for a business card to pass on to their

Saver,” “Shopper’s Guide,” or similar paper,

clients.

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

I Buy Houses Any Area, Any Condition

CASH
Completely Confidential Call 555-1212
“Bird Dogs”
Bird dogs are referrals who act as your eyes and ears looking for
leads on your behalf. You might also hear this referred to as “ant
farming.” For the hard work they provide, you pay them a finder’s
fee.
Who can be your potential bird dogs? Think of the people
who are out in the neighborhoods every day, such as the mail
carrier and the cable installer. These people are regularly going into
your prime target areas. You may also consider talking to garbage
collectors, meter readers, lawn service workers, pizza deliverers,
newspaper deliverers, code enforcement officers, firefighters, and
more.
Create flyers and reward cards
To help you find potential bird dogs, create simple flyers and reward
cards to attract them to the opportunity and explain the benefits of
your bird dog program.
To get the flyers noticed, you may want to use fluorescent
colored paper. For the reward cards, it may be best to use doublesided business cards to make them easy to pass out. If your doublesided business cards can have a fluorescent colored front and a
white back, it will help them stand out from the average business
card.
Here’s an example of how your reward card might read:

75

BIRD DOG FEES SAMPLE FLYER

$Cash reward$

$250.00
Bring me any
vacant or boarded
houses.

Cash
reward

$250.00
Bring me any
vacant or boarded
houses.

Everywhere you go, hand your reward card
out. When you go out to dinner, put one
with the tip. When you see the mail carrier,

Fluorescent color front with black lettering.

stop and give him or her a card.
	Additionally, hand out a flyer listing
the fees you would pay your bird dog. A
sample flyer might include the following
information:
• Make $5 every time you bring us the
address of a vacant or boarded up
house whether we buy it or not.
• Make $10 every time you bring us
a Polaroid picture with the address of
a vacant or boarded up house whether
we buy it or not.
• Make $250 every time you bring us
the address of a vacant or boarded
up house and we buy it (paid at closing
only). Exceptions: Please be advised that we
do not accept properties in the following
areas:
76

I will pay

$250.00

every time I
buy one!
Don’t bring me any agent signs.

Call
555-1212
White background and black lettering.

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

_______ or those with an agent sign on them or those addresses already
submitted by other bird dogs. All bird dogs are paid upon a first-come,
first-served basis.

Niche Marketing

Signs
A fluorescent yellow sign with black writing attracts attention. Make
it a simple one-line ad that can easily be read from a distance
and include your phone number. Post your signs wherever you are
allowed in your city. For example, post signs on or at:
• Bus stop benches
• Community billboards (use small signs)
• Stadium seating
• Movie theaters
• Take out menus
• Grocery store carts
•	Utility posts or telephone poles
(best when they are posted up high)
• Major intersections
(use surveyor stakes to put them in the ground)
You can go to an office supply store and buy a package of
fluorescent paper (8-1/2 x 11 sheets – 100 sheet package) for
your signs. Place them in plastic sheet protectors and staple them on
telephone poles. Or use plastic corrugated sheets (lightweight, but
sturdy sheets of plastic) for your signs and attach them with roofing
nails. Make sure you are not violating any city codes.

77

Example signs might be:

in the neighborhood. Car windows and
mailboxes are off limits.

I buy
houses
for cash
555-1212

Door hangers
People generally respond well to door
hangers. Most printers will design and cut
them out for you. Hire someone to deliver
them or incorporate passing them out into
an exercise routine and do it yourself.
Bulletin boards

In the beginning, you will need to have an

Put flyers anywhere you see bulletin boards,

answering machine. The message they get

such

when they call might be something like:

restaurants, the community center, the

“Hi! I’m Jimmy. If you’re interested in buying

unemployment office, a city center, and mail

or selling a house…”

centers. Every

	Later, you may want to use an

place, look to see if they offer a community

answering service; people like to talk to a

bulletin board where you can post your

live person.

information.

Flyers

Car washes

Design an 8-½ x 11-inch flyer and distribute

Ask the manager if they can hand out your

it door to door in the neighborhoods where

flyers. Offer to pay them per car.

you want to buy. The flyer should read like
an ad:
“We buy houses, fast cash, fast closing times,
any condition, any price, 555-1212.”
You can hire students or people from
your local labor board to distribute the
flyers. Two people can put out 500 flyers
in three hours. Put your flyers on every door

78

as

grocery

stores,

laundromats,

time you enter a business

Handouts
You can provide handouts wherever you
are, wherever it is allowed. You may be
able to distribute handouts at some school
or local events, for example.

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

Magnetic car signs
Put magnetic car signs on your car. It can give you credibility to be
in the neighborhood.
WE BUY HOUSES CASH OR TERMS PHONE #
Check with your car insurance company to see if you need to
change your coverage (some car insurance companies will consider
it a vehicle used for business if you display a magnetic car sign and
you will need to have that in the policy).
Drive for dollars
As you are driving around looking for vacant houses, have your
signs in the back of your car along with a staple gun and tape.
Every time you see a vacant house, not only should you be writing
down the address, but you should also get out of the car and put
a sign on the vacant house (the wording can be the same as the
magnetic car sign). Make sure the signs are large enough to be read
from the street. We are not only trying to get the vacant homeowner
to call; we also want motivated sellers who happen to see our sign
to call us.
Cooperative advertising
Have you ever received mail that contains advertisements for several
companies in one envelope, like Valpak®? Everyone shares in the
production costs, reducing your own cost. Make sure the message
is simple. The mailing company may have people on staff who can
help you design your ad.
	Align yourself with a couple of banks or credit unions. Talk to
the branch manager and tell them you are involved in mailings and
ask them to join you. Tell them that every week, you will go to the

79

Chamber of Commerce and pull out leads

to continuous advertising or advertising

and send their information along with yours.

mixed with a few TV news-related programs.

Suggest that their part of the deal be to pay

In some markets, the cost of advertising on

for the postage.

this channel can be relatively inexpensive,

Direct mail
Make sure that when you mail to people in
your target area, you do repeat mailings. It
usually takes four mailings for most people
to respond. If you want to target a specific
area, you can get a list of owners and
addresses from your title company. Some
people will use a reverse address book.
Yellow page listings
Successful investors advertise in the same
section as real estate professionals. Make
sure you advertise that if they call you, they
will not be paying a commission. You want
to stand out from the crowd.
Listing publications

is often the best time to advertise, when
people who can’t sleep turn on the TV.
	Additionally, you may want to consider
radio advertising, which is another great
way to market your business, usually with
less competition for your services.
Restrooms
In some public restrooms, low-cost advertising
is offered on the back of the stall doors.
Business cards
Your business cards should say something
simple and to the point like:
I BUY HOUSES, CASH, ANY CONDITION
or

Consider placing a small display ad

I BUY AND SELL HOUSES

approximately 1” x 2” in your Sunday

or

newspaper’s free TV listings guide. The cost

WE BUY HOUSES CASH!

is usually quite reasonable.
Radio and television

80

especially during non-peak times. This

Or
WE SOLVE REAL ESTATE PROBLEMS

Most cable programming offers a TV listings

You want your business cards to clearly

channel showing what will be on for that

state what you do. Avoid phrases like “real

day. The top of the screen is usually devoted

estate investor” which means nothing to a

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

motivated seller. They are only interested in what you can do for
them: I BUY HOUSES, CASH! Your name should be the smallest
information on the card. Hand them out everywhere, such as
restaurants, barbershops or salons, stores, and offices. You should
be ordering new cards every three months or you are not getting
the best use out of them.

networking resources

Banks, mortgage companies, credit and finance
The people at these businesses deal regularly with investors and,
quite often, are investors themselves. They sometimes have REOs
(real estate owned – bank owned properties), foreclosures, and
other leads.
Private lenders
Private lenders can be more than a great financial resource; they
can also be a resource for potential deals. As more and more buyers
turn to them instead of banks and traditional mortgage companies
for loans, many of these private lenders start to build an inventory
of foreclosed properties when those loans default. Sometimes they
just want to cash out.
Title companies
Title companies close for other investors. By networking with them,
you can often find out what other investors are doing.
Ask the title company to let you know when deals don’t go through
and to alert you to those opportunities.

81

Relocation directors

to let you know of investors who are looking

When an employee of a large corporation

to sell and to tell you what’s right or wrong

is relocated, the company will often market

with their properties.

or buy the employee’s previous home as
part of their relocation package. These
corporations become extremely motivated
to unload these homes. To find them, start
by mailing letters to the relocation directors
of major employers in your area. You will
need to get the address for the corporate
headquarters, which may be out of state. Let
them know what you are looking for. If they
don’t have anything at this time, ask them to
keep your letter on file so they can contact
you if something in your area becomes
available.
Property managers
Property managers often manage properties
for out-of-state investors who may be tired
of owning property in another state or
for investors who don’t take care of their
properties for any number of reasons. Many
property managers also actively invest in
property themselves. Network with these
individuals; they always come across deals
and are a great resource if you end up
needing property management yourself.
Remember, as managers of properties for
other investors, they are in a good position

Section 8
You can get a free database of owners who
do Section 8. Go to the Section 8 housing
office and get a list of properties for rent with
Section 8. Try to get a list of 1-to 4-bedroom
rentals. Bail Bondsman will also be on the
list if doing rentals.
City code enforcement
Get a list of houses with code violations
from them. They tag the houses, so they
know before everyone else which ones are
vacant or have a code violation. In some
regions, the city council has a website and
you can pull up the minutes from their council
meetings. The code enforcement person has
to fill out a daily form.
Appraisers
You can learn a lot from appraisers, such as
what needs to be done to qualify for FHA.
An appraiser also knows when deals won’t
work because the house doesn’t meet code.
They know a lot of investors and sometimes
hear of deals.
Attorneys
Contact bankruptcy attorneys. The attorney

82

doesn’t care what the property sells for; they

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

get the same amount of money regardless. And most of them only
have two or three investors they know to contact with opportunities.
In bankruptcy cases, the owner usually wants or needs the property
sold quickly. Usually they will settle for pennies on the dollar.
Contact attorneys who handle probate (check the Yellow
Pages). Get on their contact list to be the first person they call to sell
property. They want CASH – the advantage you want to give them
is that you can buy with cash.
	Additionally, attorneys know of people who are having
financial or legal problems and need to sell their real estate.
Contact attorneys who specialize in real estate, foreclosure, estate
planning, and divorce. Network with them and ask them to refer
your services!
Accountants
Accountants work with people having financial or tax problems.
They will most likely not give out names, but they may be willing to
give your name to their clients.
Insurance agents
Insurance agents have clients facing issues such as fire and water
damage, vacant homes, and mold. These situations can create
motivation on the part of the owner of such a house, and sometimes
the insurance company and lender. If they know you buy these kinds
of properties, they may be more than happy to pass this information
on to their clients.
Bail bondsmen
When bail bondsmen bail people out of jail, some of those
people will have money and some of them will have property.
Send postcards to the bondsmen in your area. If they own a lot
of properties, they put signs out to get more people calling. They
83

are used to buying and selling and they get

can’t sell at a discount until after the four-

properties really cheap. They usually buy for

year period or no one would donate.

collateral and sell when they have too much

You might send a letter that reads:

inventory. Some will do Section 8 rentals.
Health and senior services

To whom it may concern:

Health and senior services workers often

Hello, My name is _____________. I am a local

take care of people who have no family

real estate investor in your area. I am writing you

to leave their properties to. In some cases,

to inquire about charitable donated properties

the nursing homes have the right to sell the

you may have in the church’s portfolio. If your

assets. This is one time when you definitely

church has any single family homes or investment

cannot put “and/or assigns.” The judge

properties that have been donated, I may be

wants to know who bought the property.

interested in making an offer on any or all of

Contact the manager or the executors. Send

them.

a postcard:
Thank you for your consideration in this matter.
Attn: Nursing Home Director We buy homes
CASH

Condemned and fire damaged

Charitable organizations –

properties

a hidden market!

Contact the health department, fire marshal,

When a person donates real estate to

and the city code enforcement department

a church or charitable organization, the

to locate these types of properties.

appraised value is tax deductible. There is
a four-year hold for the full tax deduction.
If a church or charitable organization sells
at a discounted price before the four-year
period, the person who donates will not
get the full deduction , so churches and
charitable organizations are left holding a
lot of property, but they need the cash. They

84

Sincerely,

Investors and investment clubs
Investors are a great source for both buyers
and sellers. For example, wholesalers (see
the chapter on wholesaling) are always
looking to quick-turn property and can lead
you to some great deals.

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

Too many investors don’t want to work with other investors.
This is ridiculous. Somehow they have a false notion they will be
supporting their competition if they share ideas or make deals with
each other, but that just makes them miss out on some amazing win/
win opportunities. In fact, the most successful wholesale investors
work almost exclusively with other investors. They recognize that
they don’t have to spend all their time working with potential
homeowners who are often unsophisticated when it comes to real
estate; they can instead work with investors who understand the
business, who can move quickly on deals, and who know how to
spot good deals when they see them.
The bottom line is networking with other investors can be both
educational and profitable.
To begin building relationships with other investors, look for
their ads in local newspapers and contact real estate investment
clubs in your local area. Ask investors, bankers, and real estate
agents if they know where a local investment club meets. Attending
club meetings is a great way to sharpen your real estate skills,
network with like-minded individuals, and find great deals.
Clubs usually meet once a month and have a guest speaker
who may provide valuable information about your area. But don’t
judge the club by the speaker; look at the investors attending. Who
are the members? How can they help you? Are they friendly?
Most clubs charge a monthly or yearly fee to members, so ask
if you can go free on a complimentary first visit. At investor clubs
you will be able to find referrals to build your power team. You may
find deals, a hard moneylender, or creative financing. Locating a
good one is worth the effort.
	Now go out and find a motivated seller and get a great deal!

85

review

• Tracking Vacant or Boarded 		
	Houses
– 	Drive up and down your target area

The secret to great deals is finding a motivated
seller. We do not want to waste time working
with sellers who are not flexible with their
price or terms.
We find these sellers in many ways:
• Use a Realtor®
– Work with more than one agent
– 	Have the real estate
		 professional search the MLS
		 using the keywords you have
		 learned
– Create a flyer to attract aggressive
		 agents
• FSBO Signs
– Take different routes while driving in
		 the car
– Write down the phone number and
		 call or knock on the door

– Write down addresses of any
		 vacant or distressed properties
– 	Locate the owner
– Talk to neighbors
– Check county records
– 	Send out letters
– Check with the utility company
– Check the phone book or call In
		 formation
– Check a reverse directory if you have
		 a mailing address and want a phone
		 number
– 	Look on the Internet
– 	Do a skip trace
•	Auctions
– Call auctioneers and ask to be put
		 on their mailing list
– Can make a n offer before the
		 auction
– Check out absolute auctions
•	Foreclosure Auctions
– 	Attend an auction
– Research

the

property

with

		 due diligence if you plan on buying
– Good place to meet and network
		 with other investors
86

Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers

•	HUD, VA, FDIC, IRS
– 	Visit the HUD website: www.hud.				
		 gov/homes/homesforsale.
– Bids must be submitted by an 				
		 approved real estate professional
– Good deals in some areas of the country
– 	Do not bid on owner occupied list unless you intend to live
		 in the house
• Garage Sales
– People get rid of their junk before they sell
– Get out and talk with the owners
– 	Ask about the neighborhood and may be thinking of
		 selling
• Courthouse
– 	Foreclosures
– Private note holders
– 	Owners of vacant houses
–

Divorce

– 	Out-of-stat e owners
– 	Houses with tax liens
– 	Lis Pendens
– Probate sales
– 	Estate sales
– Bankruptcies
– 	Eviction filings

87

•	Local Newspaper

– 	Direct mail

– Check out the classifieds

– 	Yellow Pages

– Place a goldmine ad

– TV listing publications

– 	Legal newspaper

– Radio and television ads
– Restrooms

• Bird Dogs

– Business cards

– 	Let others be your “eyes and ears”
– Pass out flyers
– Mail carrier
– Cable installer

•	Networking
– Banks, mortgage companies,
		 credit, and finance

– Garbage collector

– Private lenders

– Meter reader

– Title companies

– 	Lawn services

– Relocation director s

– Pizza delivery

– Property managers

– Paper carrier

– 	Section 8

– Code enforcement

– City code enforcement

– 	Firefighter

– 	Appraisers

– 	Offer a finder’s fee

– 	Attorneys
– 	Accountants

• Niche Marketing
– Signs

– Bail bondsmen

– 	Flyers

– 	Health and senior services

– 	Door hangers

– Charitable organizations

– Bulletin boards

– People who serve legal documents

– Car washes

– Condemned and fire damaged

– 	Handouts
– Magnetic car signs
– 	Drive for dollars
– Cooperative advertising

88

– 	Insurance agents

		 properties
– 	Investors and investment clubs

chapter
six

89

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

Making
Quick Cash:
Wholesales
W

holesaling is immediate money

value. These properties can be single

in your pocket. When you

family or multi-family homes, but most

wholesale a property, you are buying

of the properties you wholesale will

and selling, not buying, fixing, and

be single family. This is because there

selling. You don’t need to get a loan

is a larger inventory of single family

to buy the property. You never fix it up.

homes to pick from and your buyer,

You don’t have to put a lot of time and

the investor, will most likely be more

work into the house. You simply put the

interested in the single family homes.

property under contract and sell it to a

	You will find your best deals

buyer without ever having purchased

in

it. Once you have a property under

abandoned,

contract, you should be able to have

properties no one is really looking to

a “payday” a week to ten days later!

buy. Banks won’t finance condemned

This is called quick-turning a property.

properties.

When you wholesale, you are using

won’t insure them. Most real estate

a buy low, sell low strategy. The type

agents won’t list them. You should be

of real estate you will be looking at

targeting these types of houses.

properties

that
or

are

vacant,

boarded

up

Insurance

–

companies

will be considerably below market
91

Properties

like

this

usually

have

motivated sellers. For some reason the

where to find wholesale deals

owners are unable to take care of them or
just don’t want them. The houses don’t have
to be boarded up, just rundown and unable
to be financed. You are targeting problem
properties. You want properties that are
physically distressed.
	Sounds pretty bad – nothing you really
want to fix up, so why are we talking about
these types of houses? Don’t we stress
“cosmetic work only?”

In the last chapter, we discussed how to
locate motivated sellers and, in doing so,
find the “deal.” Use the ideas given there
to help you locate this kind of property. In
the meantime, here is a quick review of the
techniques we have found most useful in
finding wholesale deals:
• Read and advertise in your local

	Some of the properties may only need

newspapers

cosmetic repair, but many will need major

– Check out the classifieds

renovations. They may be in marginal

– Place a goldmine ad

neighborhoods.

–	Use the legal newspaper

What

you

need

to

remember is:

–	Use bird dogs (pass out flyers and
		 offer a finder’s fee)

THERE IS NO FIX-UP.

– Mail carrier

WE BUY AND SELL AS-IS!

– Cable worker

Remember, the key to any real estate deal
is buying right. With wholesaling, you buy
them ugly and sell them ugly to investors,
maximizing your profits with minimal effort.
Now that’s definitely buying right!

92

– Garbage collector
– Meter reader
–	Lawn service worker
– Pizza deliverer
– Paper carrier
– Code enforcement officer
–	Firefighter

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

• Market your services whenever, wherever possible
–	Signs
–	Flyers
–	Door hangers
– Bulletin boards
– Car washes
–	Handouts
– Magnetic car signs
–	Direct mail
– Business cards
•	Drive for dollars (see the next section)

driving for dollars

Pick the areas of town that are known for having distressed
properties (identify two to five neighborhoods that would have these
types of properties). You will be looking at low to moderate class
neighborhoods and “we care” neighborhoods. These are the areas
where you will find investors rehabbing and where you might see
Habitat for Humanity building affordable homes. Look for areas that
have a lot of renters. Homeowners living there have usually lived
there for several years and many have their homes paid for.
Once you have identified the areas with these characteristics, you
will be “driving for dollars” (literally driving around, looking for
profitable deals). As you drive in your car, look up and down each
street trying to locate vacant or abandoned houses. You can easily
spot these kinds of properties. Look for:

93

• Tall grass, leaves all over, snow not
plowed
•	Lots of newspapers in the yard, at the
bottom of the driveway, or on the porch
•	No curtains or window coverings
• Broken windows, boarded up windows
and doors
• City or county stickers
•	Abandoned automobiles, junk in the
yard
• Missing utility meters (electric, gas,

Cash
reward

$250.00
For finding vacant and
boarded up houses.
Any area. Any condition.

555-1212

water)
•	Flyers stuck in the door
• Property in bad shape – needs work
(might be “ugly”)
• Mail piled up in the mailbox

Let others be your bird dogs – your eyes and
ears. Offer them a reward for helping you
achieve success.
Tell everyone in your world what you are

While you are driving for dollars, write

doing! Talk to the grocery store clerk, your

down the addresses of the distressed

hairdresser or barber, people at your church,

properties you find. And be sure to talk to

those you work with, and the waitress where

neighbors, mail carriers, cable workers,

you dine. Let all your friends know what you

and utility workers. Create a “reward flyer”

are doing. Get the word out!

and hand it out. Here’s an example of how

	Additionally, put magnetic car signs

your reward flyer might read:

on your vehicle. Many of our students have
had tremendous success making money
simply off calls from people who saw their
magnetic car signs.
While driving for dollars, you should
also have signs in the back of your car along
with a staple gun and some tape. Make the
words bold and large enough so they can

94

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

be read from the street. Too many words will make it harder to read.
Keep the wording simple, such as:
WE BUY HOUSES CASH Phone #
Use colorful, fluorescent paper to attract attention. We want
everyone to see these signs.
If a house is boarded up, staple the sign on one of the boards. If it
isn’t boarded up, but it is abandoned, tape the sign on a window.
If the house has a “no trespassing” sign, then don’t put the sign up.
Try to place the signs where they can be easily seen and read, even
from the street. You want people with unwanted houses calling you!
You can also have surveyor stakes that you can attach the sign to
and place in the ground at intersections and very visible areas.
When you drive for dollars, you are not only trying to find distressed
properties, but you are also letting everyone know you buy houses.
$CASH$ FOR HOUSES
Any Area, Any Condition CALL NOW! Phone #
When you find a vacant home, ask the neighbors if they know how
you can reach the owner (see How to Find the Owners of Vacant
Houses in the previous chapter). Or you can go to the courthouse
where the property taxes are paid to see if you can find their name.
They may have a different mailing address.

95

assignment of contract
and double closing

to assign him or her the contract (the fee you
are charging for having found and made
this great deal that you are passing along).
The typical fee for an assignment of contract

There are two ways you can wholesale a
property. You will either do an assignment of
contract or a double closing (also referred to
as a simultaneous closing).

is around $3,000 to $5,000. However,
students have made $10,000 or more
(when your profit is this high, you will want
to do a double closing instead, which we
will discuss in a moment).

Assignment of Contract

When you assign the contract, you will make

With an assignment of contract, you will

sure you collect a non-refundable deposit. If

have two contracts. One will be a purchase

you can collect the full assignment fee at that

and sale contract between you and the seller

time, by all means take it. Otherwise, try

of the property. In this assignable contract,

to get half of the fee or at least $1,000 to

you will put your name plus the additional

$2,000. That way, if for some reason your

words “and/or assigns” beside it (i.e, John

buyer backs out, you still have made some

Smith and/or assigns). This gives you the

money.

right to assign the contract. The idea here

	In essence, what you have done is sold

is you have used your expertise to negotiate

your purchase contract to your buyer. You

a fantastic deal with the seller and now you

never own the property, you should not have

are assigning your right to make that deal on

to pay closing costs, and your name will not

the terms you have negotiated to someone

appear on the deed. You get the property

else, your buyer.

under contract, assign the contract, and

The second contract will be between you
and your buyer and is called an assignment

make money. It’s a terrific and very popular
way to make money in real estate.

of contract. An assignment of contract will

96

have the address of the property, as well

Double Closing

as information about the seller, about you

(or Simultaneous Closing)

as the original buyer, and about the buyer

Because your buyer will know how much

you are assigning the contract to. It will also

money you are making with an assignment

have the amount your buyer is paying you

of contract, you will want to make sure you
don’t care if he or she has this information.

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

Most investors and sellers will not mind you making some money.
You should be paid for your expertise and foresight. But if they
think you are making too much money, they may try to go behind
your back or not work with you again. So generally speaking,
when you are going to be making a lot of money on the deal (say,
more than $7,000), you will do what’s called a double closing (or
simultaneous close).
With a double closing, you will have two purchase and sale
contracts. You will have one between you and the seller of the
property. The other purchase and sale contract will be between
you and your buyer. This is how it works: You actually buy the
property and sell it in a simultaneous closing to your buyer. The
title company or closing attorney handles the transaction for you,
making everything happen simultaneously and smoothly, but without
ever having you, your buyer, or the seller together at the same table.
Your buyer will usually be asked to come in first to close with you as
the seller. They will bring the money that is needed to purchase the
property (you will later use this money to pay the seller). The money
given to the title company or lawyer sits in a trust until the original
seller of the property comes to sign their paperwork associated with
you as the buyer. You will come in last and sign both sides of the
transaction (as a seller and as a buyer). The seller will only see the
transaction between you and him or her. Likewise, your buyer will
only see the contract between the two of you. There will be closing
costs that you may have to pay.

contingencies

Note: This section offers only general guidelines no legal advice is being
offered. Always consult with your local attorney for guidance.

97

Because the properties you are looking at

If the FSBO house is not vacant, then put in

to wholesale are not the sort of properties

a clause of:

you really want to buy, you will want to
use contingencies (“subject to”) to protect
yourself if you don’t find a buyer (consult a
lawyer for assistance).
	In both the assignment of contract
and the double closing, you will use the
same contingencies and conditions in your
addendum.
In the addendum, you may consider adding
these contingencies and conditions.”
•	Sale is contingent upon inspection
and approval of bids by Buyer and
Buyer’s partner to be completed in
writing within _________ business
days.
•	Upon acceptance of the offer, buyer
to receive key to the property and
have the right to show to any and all
prospective occupants.
Use this second contingency is generally
used if it is a FSBO. If the property is listed
with a real estate professional, put:
• Buyer to receive access to the property
upon acceptance of offer.
98

• Buyer shall have access to the
property for the purpose of showing
the property to prospective occupants
and to obtain bids on repairs.
An optional contingency you may add (be
aware that too many “subject to” clauses
can kill a deal):
• 	It is agreed that Buyer has 30
business days from the date of this
offer to perform due diligence. This
may include determining any needed
repairs, researching the title, and
confirming market value. In the event
the Buyer determines that the property
does not meet with his/her approval,
the contract will become null and
void, and the Buyer’s deposit returned
immediately.
When doing an assignment of contract,
give yourself as long of a closing date as
you can (preferably at least 45 to 60 days).
If you don’t have a buyer within two to three
weeks, back out of the deal. We don’t want
to hurt people and get the reputation of tying
up properties and never purchasing them.

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

TITLE COMPANIES OR CLOSING ATTORNEYS

A critical element in being able to do an assignment of contract or a
double closing is having a good closing officer who knows how to
do them. Start calling title companies (or attorneys if your state uses
attorneys for real estate closings). You will need to get past the front
desk and speak to the actual person who handles the closings. Ask
them if they have worked with investors. Can they do assignment
of contracts or double closings? Have they ever done them before?
	Do not be discouraged if they don’t seem to know what you are
talking about. It is not uncommon for title companies and even some
attorneys to be unfamiliar with double closings and assignment of
contracts.
	If you feel like giving up, don’t; just keep calling until you find
one who understands what you want to do. Sometimes it helps to
get a referral from an investor who has done this before.
Make sure the closing agent understands you do not plan to
bring any money to the closing table when you are talking about
double closings. You are simply bringing two purchase contracts:
one between the seller and you, the other between you and your
buyer. Ask them what they would charge you to handle this type of
transaction.
	Also ask if they charge you to do an assignment of contract.
Routinely, it will be the seller and your buyer who pay the closing
costs. You are just the middleman and once you have assigned the
contract, you are out of the deal except for the fact that they will cut
you a check for the agreed upon fee that is listed in the assignment
of contract.
	Ask the closing agent if they have had any problems doing an

99

assignment of contract or a double closing.

•	You will also like dealing with

They may tell you that when your buyer’s

investors because cash or hard money

lender looks at the assignment of contract,

means a quick closing. Wouldn’t you

they may say, “Who is this Joe Buyer? We

rather have a paycheck a week after

want the contract between Sally Seller and

finding your buyer instead of waiting

Jim (your new) Buyer. Get Joe out of the

30 days?

way.” Well that will work if Sally Seller is
willing to redo the contract. Otherwise you
have a problem!

building a database of buyers

There are many reasons why we want to

You may be worrying, “How will I find the

work with an investor:

buyer?” Finding the buyer is the easy part
when you have the right price accepted.

•	An investor does not have to “fall in

When you wholesale, it is not location,

love with the property.” They will

location, location. Rather, it is the deal,

crunch the numbers and if it’s a great

the deal, the deal! If you can buy it cheap

deal, they want it.

enough, you will have an investor who will
want the property. In fact, investors will keep

•	Investors have access to hard money

coming back to you for more.

or cash. Hard money and cash don’t

When you wholesale a property, you should

care if it’s an assignment of contract

create a database of buyers. Don’t panic if

or a double closing. You should build

you find an exceptional deal and you don’t

a database of hard moneylenders for

have any investors in your database. You

you to use if later on you want to

should have no problem finding a buyer

buy, fix, and sell, and for your buyers

who will want to purchase the property. If

(if a buyer needs hard money to close

there is money for the investor to make, he

the deal, you can refer him or her to

or she will want it. However, you should start

the hard moneylender).

networking with other investors and building
your database as soon as you possibly can.

100

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

There are many ways and places for you to find investors for your
database, including:
•	Investment clubs
• Auctions
• Properties with “For Rent” signs (write down phone numbers
and call)
• Talk to people rehabbing a home and ask who the owner is
(probably an investor)
• People who call off your signs
• Real estate professionals, title companies, attorneys, 			
appraisers, contractors, bankers
• Calling the “I buy” ads
•	Advertising
The following offers a little more insight into how to tap these sources
for your database.
Real estate investment clubs
When you attend your local investment club, you need to network
with the investors there. These are potential buyers for your deals.
You will find endless possibilities when you rub shoulders with other
investors.
Tell everyone what you are planning on doing and see who is
interested. Ask them what types of properties they are interested in
and in what areas. Ask them if you can call them when you find a
property you think fits their requirements.
Auctions
Attend a real estate auction. You will see other investors there. Talk
to them. Get their business cards and give them yours. Again, your
goal is to find out what kind of investing they do to see how you can
101

work with them. Let them know what you do

Real estate professionals, bankers,

and tell them you come across phenomenal

appraisers, lawyers, etc.

deals but you simply cannot buy everything

Professional people who are in the real

you find. Tell them you will gladly contact

estate business know investors. They are

them when you find a property they may be

people you want to interact with.

interested in purchasing.
Properties with “For Rent” signs
Properties that are offered for rent are oftened
owned by investors. Perhaps they are
looking to purchase additional properties. It
never hurts to call and ask.
Talk to rehabbers
If you see someone rehabbing a property,
ask them if they are an investor. You might
find yourself talking to the investor or with
a member of his or crew. If an investor is

Call all the “I buy” ads you see in the
newspaper, such as advertisements that
read: “I buy houses. Pay cash. Any area,
any condition.” There are usually two
categories of people who place these ads:
1) wholesalers – buy low and sell low; and
2) retailers – buy, fix, and sell properties or
buy, fix, and keep properties.
When you talk to the wholesalers:

rehabbing a property in one of the areas

• Tell them you’re looking to buy some

you are focusing on, then he or she may

properties

want a deal you find in that same area or

•	Let them know you are a new investor

one similar to the property they’re already

in town and you need

working on. Let the investor know you are

some deals

just starting out and that you will be looking

•	Ask them if they have any inventory

for houses that need to be rehabbed. Ask

(properties for sale)

them if they would like you to contact them

•	If they have inventory, ask them to fax

when you find a rehab for a good price.

you a list of the

Most would be happy to have you bring
them a good deal. You save them time
researching so they can spend more time
rehabbing.

102

Call the “I Buy” ads

properties they have for sale

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

Next, drive by the properties. Now you will see where these
wholesalers are finding the good deals and where wholesale
deals are being done in a short period of time. You will find that
wholesalers typically farm an area. Usually they concentrate in two
to three different areas. You’ll also see how much they’re asking for
the properties and what type of houses they have.
Call them back and say:
“I might be interested in some of the properties you have for sale. I
like working with investors. I don’t care how much money you are
going to make on a deal as long as I get the deal I need. By the
way, the properties here on the list, are you going to be assigning
them or do you already own them?”
If they say they’re an assignment of contract, figure they paid about
$3,000 less than what they’re asking. If they say they own it (they
may not – but they may want more money), figure they paid about
$10,000 less than what they’re asking. Ask them if they have any
funding sources (hard moneylenders). Now we’re finding a potential
funding source for us to borrow money from. We are also finding a
funding source for our buyer to use.
When you talk to the retailers:
•	Ask them what kind of properties they
are looking for
•	Find out if they are into major rehab
or a little fix-up
•	Ask what areas they are focusing on
•	Find out what price range they prefer

103

Whatever you do, don’t become a real estate

your property, your phone should start

agent for other investors! Don’t waste time

ringing off the hook!

looking for the “one” property an investor
wants. It is helpful to know what they are

Here are a couple of sample ads:

looking for and where, but find great deals
and let everyone know what you have.
Be sure to get their phone numbers, fax,
email, etc. so you can reach them quickly.

advertise to find your buyer

As we mentioned before, don’t panic if you
don’t have any investors in your database
right now. In fact, many investors find a
great deal and get an offer accepted

3 bdr 2 bath
Terrace Park Area
Worth $160K

will
sacrifice
for $100K
Call
555-1212

without having a potential buyer lined up.
They know if the price is right, it will not be
difficult to wholesale the property. Again, this
goes back to the idea of buying right. If they
have figured in a good range of profit for
an investor, investors will want the property.
In these cases, to find their potential buyer,
they simply place an ad in the newspaper.
To attract investors, the ad should state what
the property is worth fixed up and how
much you are asking for it (what you have it
under contract for plus your profit). When the
investor sees a huge spread and calculates
his or her potential for profit in purchasing

104

3 bdr 2 bath
Valued At $80K

fire sale

$40K

Cash Buyers Only
555-1212

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

Once you have started working on a database of potential buyers
for the properties you want to wholesale, be sure to use a system
that is organized and includes their names, phone numbers, fax
number, email, and other pertinent information, such as what types
of properties they are looking for, what areas they like to invest
in, and what price range they prefer. Included in this chapter is
a Buyer Tracking Sheet for you to use until you find the system that
works best for you.

what to offer

When wholesaling a property, how do you figure out what to offer?
Here is a formula you can use:
What is the After-Repair Value (ARV) 				
				

$________________

	Subtract repairs – 						
				

$________________

	Subtract profit for the investor – 					
				

$________________

	If ARV is under $80K,
			

subtract $15K

	If ARV is over $80K,
			

subtract 20% of the ARV

			Subtract at least $5K for you – 			
				
			

$________________

(or whatever you want)

Equals the most you would offer =
		 (TOTAL)

					

$________________
105

Remember, you can always offer less. You

Let’s see how using the percentage would

may also have no clue as to the cost of

work:

repairs. You can get bids, ask the owner
what he thinks it will cost, or come up with
a ballpark figure. This doesn’t have to be
rocket science. You could get three bids
and there could be a $20,000 difference.
One investor may think it needs $10K worth

FOR EXAMPLE
minus
minus
minus
equals the most you
would offer

ARV
repairs
profit for investor
your profit (what you want)

$160,000
$30,000
$32,000
$10,000
$88,000

ARV
repairs
purchase price

$160,000
$30,000
$112,000
$18,000

of work and another thinks it will be more
like $23K. If you would rather work with
percentages, you will find it depends a
lot on the area and the prices. Here is an
average percentage guide you can use:

FOR EXAMPLE
minus
minus
leaves profit for you
and investor to split

Low-Income Areas – Offer 35 to 70%
below ARV
Working Class Areas – Offer 25 to
40% below ARV
Middle-Income Areas – Offer 20 to
30% below ARV or 30% below $160,000
Equals $112,000

This is not a deal that would be appealing
to the investor and would offer you very
little, if any, profit!
	As you can see, if there are a lot of
repairs, using percentages alone will not
work. If there had been only 10K worth of
work, here is how the numbers would have
gone offering 30% below. This would be an
easy deal to wholesale to an investor!

106

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

negotiating with the seller

1		Introduce yourself
2		Find out if they are the seller
3		Ask, “Do you have a few minutes to answer some questions?”
Now take a moment and explain a little about how you operate.
You need to let the seller know how and why you buy. You need to
let them know you buy one of two ways: cash or terms.
“When I buy with all CASH, it is at a discount. I will fix up
the property and sell it on a new loan to a new owner. Often,
this requires me to do a lot of repairs and bring it up to minimum
housing codes. Or I buy the property with terms such as owner
financing and that usually means I will keep it as a rental. I may
even owner finance it for one of our potential homeowners that we
currently have approved.”
If you have their interest, continue to see if it’s a real deal!
4. 		 Where is the property located?
5. 		How much are you asking?
6. 		Do you own the property free and clear?
7.		If YES, this is great because they can do whatever they
		 want to do.
8. 		If NO, ask:
			 a. What is your Loan Balance?
			 b. How many years are left on the principal balance?
			 c.	How much are the monthly payments? Does this include
				

taxes and insurance (PITI)?

		 d. What is the least you will take as a down payment?
107

9. Roughly, how much do you think is
needed to repair the property?

appointment with them to look at the property
immediately and get a signed contract.

10. What is the lowest you will take, on

Whatever you do, don’t procrastinate; if

a cash or a term basis? Stop and wait.

you do, someone else will get there first and

(Remember, you have told them you are

they will be the one making the money!

an investor who buys houses for cash

	A useful tip when negotiating: Most of

to resell or for terms to hold for residual

the time you should make both a cash offer

income). Let them think about it; see

and a terms offer at the same time. People

what they say.

love choices and it helps them see the

11. Have you had any offers?

difference in regards to the cash discount

		 a. If so, what were they?

versus terms. It also lets them decide if it is

		 b. Why didn’t you accept any?

really cash now that they need or getting

12. How long have you been trying to sell?

closer to the full price offer that they want,
which is only available if we can get owner

Now, you pause. Wait and see how they

financing.

respond to your conversation. Remember, if
someone is not motivated now, that does
not mean they will not be motivated later.

contracts

So, we need to let them know if it is not
going to work for us, they can call us later if
they do not have any luck in selling.
Now end with this:
“What will you do if you do not sell the
property?”

Remember, these are SAMPLE contracts. It
is recommended that you have your attorney
review your contracts to at least come up with a
good standard contract before you start preparing
contracts.
To be a binding contract, it must be in writing.
You can use contracts found in proprietary

108

This is a great way to end. It makes them

software or get one from your local Board

really think, “What if?” However, if it

of Realtors®. You can also use a Letter of

looks positive, you will need to set up an

Intent, a one-page offer that is simple and

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

helps you in negotiations when you are using a real estate agent
and don’t want to burn them out when making lots of offers at once.
Make sure they are comfortable with it.
	In order to be able to have the right to assign a contract, the
buyer’s name is listed as your name and/or assigns as the buyer.
This gives you the right to assign the contract. Always put in your
subject to clauses – give yourself a minimum of 10 business days.
This is for your protection.
Closing should be a minimum of 30 days, preferably 45 to
60 days. If the seller feels this is too long, tell him it takes about 10
business days to get all the contractor bids completed. Tell them if it
does not work for you, then you will back out of the contract within
the 10-day inspection period so it doesn’t tie up the property. Use
your title company or lawyer to close. Always try to have your seller
and your buyer pay all the closing costs.
	Do not give a large deposit, even if the agent tells you to. $10
is preferable, but you may have to give $100. Never give the
deposit to the seller. Always have the title company or your attorney
hold the check.
Here’s how it looks:
Assignment of Contract
First Contract
• Get a signed purchase contract
•	Fax purchase contract to closing agent
•	Start marketing for your new buyer
• Assign the contract Assignment Contract
•	Fax assignment contract to closing agent
• Take backup offers until closed

109

Once closed... collect your check!
What Happens on the Day of Closing?
•	New buyer comes to closing with all 		
the money
•	Seller comes to closing to sign and get
his/her money
•	You show up and get your check
Double Closing First Contract
• Get a signed purchase contract with
you as the buyer

What Happens on the Day of Closing?
•	New buyer comes to closing with all
the money
•	Seller comes to closing to sign and 		
get his/her money
•	You show up last and sign both the
purchase contract with you as the
buyer and the second purchase
contract with you as the seller and
collect your check.

why wholesaling?

•	Fax purchase contract to closing agent
•	Start marketing for your new buyer
•	Find new buyer, sign second purchase
contract with you as the seller
Second Contract
•	Fax second purchase contract to
closing agent
• Take backup offers until closed
Once closed... collect your check!

Wholesaling is one of the quickest ways you
can make money in real estate investing. And
it can work for everyone. It is not necessary
to have great people skills to negotiate a
wholesale deal. If you lack confidence,
putting money in your pocket quickly will
certainly do a lot to build confidence.
	You don’t have to use any of your
money or go out and get a loan. You don’t
have to spend a lot of time fixing up the
property. And you can avoid holding costs.
You will not have to worry that the property
may not sell and you have to keep making
those monthly payments. You don’t have the
risk that, as you rehab the home, you may
run into major issues with electrical wiring or
plumbing.

110

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

Potential wholesale properties are often very easy to locate.
You will find them in low- to middle-income neighborhoods where
there are distressed properties and more renters than owners. If
you happen to live in a middle-income neighborhood where none
of these types of properties exist, get out of the area. It will open
your eyes. Drive 20 minutes out of some cities and you will find
yourself in a totally different market. There are varying real estate
prices even in close geographic areas. Look in the areas where the
working class lives. You can do it!
	In some areas, you will find that a four hundred thousand
dollar home is a distressed property. You will see this all the time
in California. Don’t be discouraged. You can still wholesale four
hundred thousand dollar houses! You may not do as many, but you
can still make money from them. Just find the motivated seller with a
distressed property or situation.
	As your understanding of wholesaling grows, you will see that
you can apply wholesale strategies to other real estate avenues
such as pre-foreclosures. For example, you can wholesale a preforeclosure! However, you will find that HUD and VA will not allow
you to put the house under contract with “and/or assigns” attached
to it (additionally, many banks will not allow an assignment of
contract).
	Some investors will make an offer in the name of a trust and
then assign their beneficial interest to the investor before closing. Be
careful with HUD and VA foreclosures. You should never bid on the
owner occupied ones unless you plan to LIVE in them. We are not
saying planning on living there and later changing your mind. DO
NOT BID if it is on an owner occupied list. Why do we stress this
so much? Because doing otherwise can land you in jail. If the HUD
and VA properties do not sell while on the owner occupied list, they
will be offered to all bidders. That is the time you can go in and
make an offer through a HUD-certified agent.
111

When you cannot put the offer in your

	Some properties you find you may never

name and/or assigns, you can leave it

want to renovate. They may be so ugly, you

out and do a double closing. This is very

think they should be torn down. But another

characteristic of what many investors will

investor may want it for the right price.

do. Remember, some banks will allow and/

	On others, you may decide you will try

or assigns. But you will find, for the most

to wholesale the house, but if you can’t make

part, banks are not excited about and/or

the money you want from wholesaling, you

assigns.

will buy the property yourself, fix it up, and

	Another caution is that when you are

make far more money than you planned.

dealing with HUD and VA, you may find

Then there will be the properties you

they have certain stringent requirements

want to do yourself right from the start,

about the deposit and if you can get it back.

whether it is to fix the property up and sell

Find out how the system works by asking a

it or hold on to it. You may exercise other

HUD- or VA-certified agent who specializes

techniques of real estate investing while

in this kind of property.

holding the property. For example, you may
rent it out and enjoy a positive cash flow

exit strategies

along with the appreciation of the property.
Or you might decide to do a lease option
with the home, asking tomorrow’s value

Some of you may decide that after you

but having cash flow today without the

find the deal, you would rather go for the

headache of being a landlord.

big money and fix it up and resell it. That’s

	Understanding how to buy wholesale

okay.

properties opens up a variety of exit

	As you look at properties, you will be

strategies. The main thing you have to

deciding what your exit strategy will be and

remember is you just need to DO IT!

that exit strategy can change based on the
deal or your current situation.

Go

out

and

look

for

wholesale

properties. Make lots of offers and you will
find a great avenue for quick cash.
	At the close of this chapter are several
sample forms and advertisements that can
help you get started.

112

Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash: Wholesales

assignment

The following is a suggested assignment.
1 Target a low-income area
2 Know the value of homes in the area using the comps
3	Drive for dollars and market to find sellers
4 Get a real estate professional and title company on your
power team
5 Make a lot of offers
6 Get a signed purchase contract with the seller in your name
and/or assigns
7	Find your buyer
8	Sign an assignment of contract or a purchase contract with
your buyer
9	Fax the documents to a title company or real estate attorney
10 Come to the closing and sign
		 papers if doing a double
		 closing
11 Collect your check!
12 Work on the 30-Day Plan of Action
		 below
113

7. 		Develop bird dog program, offer

30-day plan of action

finder’s fee

The following is a suggested plan of action.

8. 		Drive for dollars at least 3 hours per
		week

1. Set up shop
			 a. Get a separate phone and fax line

9. 		Call the “I buy” ads

			 b. Get a d/b/a (doing business as 		

fictitious name)

10. Find and put under contract at least

			 c. Open a business checking account

one property you can assign or

			 d. Get business cards (can be simple…

double close in the next 30 days

		 		 “I Buy Houses”)
11. Be deal driven – don’t care where
2. Locate tax assessor or county website

you find the deals, just find good
deals; that’s all that matters

3. Market your business
			 a. Signs, flyers – get 1,000 printed
				 up
			 b. Postcards

for

tracking

vacant

				 houses
			 c. Run ad: “I Buy Houses”
4. Join a real estate investment club
5. Choose an area to target
6. 	Find and train at least one real
			 estate agent who understands this
			 business and is willing to make
			 multiple

offers

			 at investor’s club
114

–

possibly

find

chapter
seven

115

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

securing
the financing
W

e have already discussed

ask: “Where do I get the money?”

how you make your money

To finance your deals, you can use

in real estate when you buy and,

traditional lenders such as banks and

therefore, the importance you need

mortgage companies. But if you don’t

to place on buying right. To recap,

have the best of credit or your debt-to-

you should never pay too much for the

income ratio is too high, you will need

property. When you buy right, you are

to find alternative sources of money.

ensuring you get a great deal. And, as

In this chapter, we will discuss several

you already know, the key to finding

creative financing options available

a great deal is locating a motivated

to you, so no matter your situation

seller. But to be successful in real

or the transaction, you will have the

estate investing, you need to know not

resources you need to close the deal.

only how to find the motivated sellers
and the great deals, but also how to
find the money for those deals.

GETTING CREATIVE

	In fact, in real estate investing,
what can make or break the deal is

The more creative you are as you

the financing. So you have probably

finance your deals, the more successful

already been asking the common

you will be. A crucial element to

question many students and investors

creative real estate investing is how

117

well you solve the problems of your sellers.

transaction comes from understanding the

Motivated sellers have a need, and as

necessary ingredients that will satisfy the

you satisfy this need, you create a win/

seller’s needs, while creating a great deal

win situation. You can make a lot of money

for you in the process.

helping others solve their problems. And, as
you learn different techniques and strategies,
you will understand terms can sometimes be
more significant than price or equity. You

working with
mortgage brokers

may have heard from many well-intentioned

118

people that there is no such thing as a

As you begin to build your power team,

no money down deal. This can become

you will realize a good mortgage broker

discouraging, especially if you have heard

is essential to your being able to obtain

this said by a professional in the business,

financing for each transaction. You are

such as a real estate agent or a mortgage

looking for a creative broker who works

broker. You may even hear some investors

with investors regularly and has many

say you have to have money to buy real

financing programs available. Mortgage

estate. But think of it this way: These skeptics

brokers tend to be more creative than

have not used any creative financing or no

bankers since they have several sources

money down techniques themselves, so

for funds and a variety of loan programs

they do not comprehend how you can own

at their disposal. Sometimes, however, you

a property with no money down. Having

may find a small hometown bank will be

said that, even though many investors have

eager to help you in your investing. Some of

purchased real estate with no money down,

these hometown banks offer portfolio loans,

creative financing does not always mean

a loan the bank keeps in-house and doesn’t

“no down payment.” It usually refers to not

sell to the secondary market. When a

using any of your own money. Instead, you

lender sells a loan, there are strict guidelines

want to use OPM, an acronym for Other

they have to follow. If you have a good

People’s Money. Using various strategies

relationship with your banker and they do

and methods, as well as OPM, will afford

portfolio loans, they can sometimes be more

you almost limitless ways to fund your deals.

lenient. Otherwise, you will probably find

Structuring a successful no money down

more creative financing using a mortgage

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

broker. Some mortgage brokers have access to private funds that
require no qualifying by the borrower. Equity in the house is their
only concern. It’s not the cost of the money that matters; it’s the
availability that counts. You need a mortgage broker whenever
you are going to deal in short-term money, unless you plan to
develop relationships with your own private lenders. Generally, the
money these mortgage brokers will find for you comes from private
individuals. The only consideration for one of these private loans
is the Loan-to-Value (LTV) ratio. This short-term money is valuable
to us as investors because you can do a loan on the value of the
house, not what you paid for it. So if you buy right, you can borrow
the money to both purchase the property and cover the costs to
rehab it. You just factor these expenses into the cost of the loan.
Again, private investors are usually only concerned about LTV ratio
and the safety of their investment. Typically we call private money
“hard money” and these private lenders are sometimes called hard
moneylenders. A hard moneylender lends at a low LTV, usually 60
to 75% of the after-repair value (ARV). They charge a higher interest
rate (could be 12 to 18%) and points (1 point = 1%). The points
are based on the amount you borrow and can usually be built into
the loan. The payments are typically interest-only payments with a
balloon payment of the principal balance due in six months to one
year. Sometimes there are no payments and interest accrues with a
balloon payment of principal and interest in six months.

calling mortgage brokers

To find mortgage brokers, see if you can get a referral from a real
estate agent or another real estate investor. Otherwise, simply open
your newspaper or phone book and call those who sound creative.
119

You don’t have to make an appointment

it is okay to let them run your credit and do a

and meet with the broker; you just need

loan application so you can know just how

to make the phone call. It takes time out of

they can help you and how much you can

your busy schedule to go and meet with a

qualify for in purchasing real estate.

broker only to find he/she cannot help you,
so start with calls. When you call mortgage
brokers, you may come across someone

pre-qualified vs. pre-approved

who is rude and/or someone you are not

120

comfortable working with. Politely tell them

You may have been asked, particularly

thank you very much and hang up. Some

by a real estate agent, “Have you been

students take this personally and feel if they

pre-qualified?” or “Have you been pre-

had more knowledge, the broker would

approved?” You may have wondered what

have treated them differently. But after you

the difference is between the terms pre-

start talking with several brokers, you will

qualified and pre-approved. When you

find this simply isn’t true. Some will be rude

get pre-qualified, the mortgage broker is

or impersonal, but you will find many who

looking at your income and debt to see how

will be very helpful. As you talk with these

much you can afford to pay in a mortgage

mortgage brokers, you will see they are

payment. Based on this information, they

eager to assist you in understanding what

can then tell you the maximum amount of

they can do for you. When calling mortgage

financing you can get. They will give you

brokers or bankers, you should never give

a pre-qualification letter stating you are

them your Social Security Number. Every

qualified for a loan of “X” amount of dollars.

time they run a credit check, it lowers your

This is not a guarantee they will lend you the

score. Before you allow the broker to check

money. It is simply stating how much you can

your credit, you will want to make sure they

borrow subject to verification of employment

can help you. If you know your score, go

and income, approval of your credit, and

ahead and tell them what it is. Just don’t

an appraisal. Some sellers, particularly

give out your Social Security Number until

banks selling properties or individuals

you are sure this is the broker you want to

who are selling in a market where buyer

work with. Once you have decided this is

demand is high, require a letter of pre-

the broker you are going to work with, then

qualification before you can submit an offer.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

With pre-approval, you are considered a step closer to getting
the financing. Your income, credit, and employment information is
carefully checked. This is still not a guarantee for the loan. Other
considerations such as the appraisal and title work will
be factored in before you obtain the loan. However, with a preapproval letter, your offer to purchase will put you in a stronger
position with the seller, as your ability to obtain financing appears
more solid. Also, since the loan has been “approved,” you should
be able to close quickly. This can be very appealing to the seller.

questions to ask mortgage brokers

When you call, introduce yourself, “Hello my name is _______.
I am looking to buy some properties and have a few questions.
Do you have a few minutes?” If they say yes, then start asking
questions. Remember not to give them your Social Security Number.

1

What is the most you will lend on a non-owner occupied
property? What is the minimum amount? In some areas of the

country, you can purchase properties for $15,000. If the minimum
they will lend is $40,000, you would want to know this.

2

What is the most percentage-wise you will lend on owner
occupied loans? What is the most for investor loans? We are

talking percentage or LTV.

3

	Is that amount (the amount they are willing to lend) based
on appraised value or purchase price? Most of the time, they

will say purchase price or whichever is less (meaning appraised
value or purchase price, whichever is less). We like it when they
121

say “appraised value,” but it is harder for

the property is worth fixed up and they look

investors to find this kind of loan. But if you

at that number rather than the as-is value.

do find one who answers appraised value,
you will ask him/her specific questions. In

The next list of questions is for everyone,

this case, give the broker this scenario: Take

whether they loan based on appraised

whatever percentage they told you they

value, purchase price, or whichever is less.

would lend, then take off the percentage
sign and add thousands of dollars to
become your purchase price. In other
words, if they told you they would lend

4

	Do you allow the seller to take back a
note? When a seller takes back a note,

he is holding a second mortgage, possibly

you 80%, your purchase price becomes

what would have been your down payment.

$80,000, 90% - $90,000.00, 70% -

This can be one way to get in with no money

$70,000.00. If they told you they would

down. Some will say “yes,” some will say

lend you 80%, say to them: “Let’s assume I

“no,” and others will say “yes, but…” The

find a house that appraises for $100,000.

ones who say yes want money from you.

But my purchase price is actually $80,000

They may do an 80-10-10, meaning 80% 1st

Would you lend me $100,000?” If they

mortgage, 10% seller carry 2nd mortgage,

say no, they’re talking purchase price or

and 10% out of your pocket. Or they may do

whichever is less! If they say they would

an 80-15-5, with 5% from you. The brokers

lend you $100,000, then you will go one

who say they do allow the seller to take back

step further. Take $10,000 off the purchase

a note may still want money from you.

price no matter what number you’re using.
In this instance, we will drop the purchase

Verify just what they mean by asking:

price to $70,000. Then ask: “Suppose I
get an even better deal on this house that

“So if the seller were willing to take back a

appraises for $100,000. Instead of paying

2nd mortgage of 20%, you would give me

$80,000, my purchase price is $70,000!

an 80% 1st mortgage? Is that correct?”

Would you lend me $100,000?” If they

122

say yes, ask one more question: “Do you

You want to know now, not just before

lend on the after-repair value?” After-repair

closing, if they want money out of your

value means the appraiser says this is what

pocket.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

5

	Do you do piggybacks? A piggyback is where the broker uses
either the same lender, but two loans, or two different lenders.

It is usually an 80% 1st mortgage and a 20% 2nd mortgage. That’s
100% financing. The 80% 1st mortgage is usually at the normal
investor interest rate. The 20% is typically higher; it could be as
much as 10% interest. Not long ago, it was easy for an investor to
get a piggyback, but now it is harder. But if you have not purchased
a home, this is still commonly used for owner occupied homes.

6

	Do you have any creative financing, private investors, or hard
money? If they say they do, ask them what kind of creative

financing they have. Can they get you in with no money down? Do
they have access to a lot of hard money and work regularly with
private investors? Also, ask about the terms of the private investors
or hard moneylenders as they can vary from lender to lender.

7

	Do you have any equity lenders? Equity lenders lend a low
	LTV, usually anywhere from 60 to 70% of the appraised value.
Typically, they are not as expensive (point and interest wise) as a
hard moneylender. The loan is usually a short-term loan of one to
two years and there could be a prepayment penalty on the loan.

8

	Do you offer any loans for fixing up the property? Sometimes
they have rehab loans to fix up the property or construction

loans where they lend you the money to buy the property and rehab
it. Sometimes they have Title One loans and FHA 203K loans.

9

	Do you have any non-conforming loans available, given the
tight lending guidelines in place at the present time? While

lending guidelines are currently hampered by constraints, money
does seem to be loosening up at the time of this writing, so we
are including some of the types of loans that have historically
123

been available and encourage you to ask

No Doc – No documentation. This type

your mortgage broker about them. While

of loan only requires verification of where

they may not all be available in today’s

you have lived for the last two years. No

lending market, things change rapidly and

income, no assets, no employment. These

a creative and knowledgeable lender will

loans have a little higher interest rate than

have some, if not all, of these loan products

conforming loans, but offer a lot more

at their disposal.

versatility to an investor.

10

Here are some examples of non-conforming
loans and their description:

		

itself or do you look at my income?

If you are buying income property, they will

Stated income loans – You do not

usually count 75% of the income. As long

have to prove how much money you make.

as your mortgage, taxes, and insurance are

It originally started for business owners who

less than 75%, you should not have a lot of

take a lot of deductions.

difficulty qualifying for the loan.

11

No ratio loans – No debt-to-income

		Up to how many units do you lend?

ratio. They will

		Up to four is considered residential;

verify employment and
If you are

five or more is considered commercial.

self-employed, they need to see a two-year

Commercial loans will be different and

business license or verification from a CPA

you don’t need to know how they work

of two years employment.

at this time. But if you do find a great

assets, but not your income.

NINA – No income or asset verification.
They will check your credit and verify you
have a job. They will not verify where you
are getting your down payment. It can come
from a third party! They don’t care where the
money comes from (cash advance, relative,
etc).

124

		Is the loan based on the property

commercial property later on, you will know
which brokers to call back, including the
commercial loan officer at the bank.

12
		

What is the interest rate? This will

		

change from day to day, but it

helps to have a ballpark number.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

13
14
15
		

What kind of fees do you charge? When they talk about

		

points, remember one point equals one percent of the

		

loan.

		Do you allow the seller to pay the closing costs? How
		

much do closing costs typically run? They will usually

allow the seller to pay 3% of the purchase price in closing costs.
		Do you allow some type of seller concession, such as a
		

repair or decorating allowance? Usually they will allow

the seller to give a repair or decorating allowance that will come
out at closing. They usually allow a certain percentage. If they tell
you 6%, ask if the seller pays the closing costs, is that 6% total, or
6% concession plus 3% closing cost, equaling a total of 9%? Often,
they allow a maximum of 6% to be paid by the seller.

16

		How long does it usually take to get an approval? How
		

quickly can you close? You want to make sure you put a

long enough timeframe in your contract. Usually make your closing
date a little longer than the broker expects it to be.

17
18
		

What would you like to see in a loan package? Try to

		

have everything they ask for to expedite the loan process.

		If the seller were to put me on the deed, could I get a
		

refinance loan instead of a purchase loan? Refinance is

always based on appraised value. If we buy below the appraised
value of the property, we can get in with no money down. Be sure
to ask them if there is any “seasoning.” Seasoning means you are
required to have been on the deed for a period of time, usually six
months to one year.

125

seller financing

allow you to transfer a mortgage to another
property (substitution of collateral clause) or
allow you to obtain a new first mortgage
(right to subordinate clause). There are no

What is seller financing? Seller financing

due on sale or balloon payment provisions

simply means the seller is not getting all cash

in the mortgage if you do not put them there.

at closing. It may mean the seller receives no

Some sellers will actually do 100% financing.

cash, but will receive mortgage payments

Always ask the seller if they will carry 100%

from you each month. They are the bank!

of the financing. Worst-case scenario, they

They did not lend you the money; instead,

tell you no. But sometimes they will say yes!

they took a promissory note and secured

When trying to get the seller to create

that note with a mortgage.

100% financing, you have to gain their trust.

	Sometimes the seller will receive some

If they are concerned about no cash from

cash at closing from the loan you received

you, you can help them feel more secure by

from the bank and the difference between

giving something extra.

the loan and the purchase price in payments

With any mortgage or deed of trust,

as a second mortgage. For this to work, you

there are two basic documents. The first is

will need to find a lender who allows the

a promissory note given by the buyer to the

seller to carry some of the financing.

seller acknowledging the debt as well as a

	Seller financing is the best financing

promise to pay and the terms of the note.

of all. You will find you save money by not

The other is a security instrument called a

having to pay fees associated with getting

mortgage or deed of trust.

a loan, such as points and origination fees.

	In the mortgage or deed of trust, the

Often, you can negotiate a better interest

buyer who signed the promissory note

rate, especially when savings accounts in

pledges

banks are receiving lower interest rates.

as security (collateral) for the debt. The

	And with owner financing, you can

mortgage is a lien, not evidence of the

easily negotiate certain terms in the mortgage

debt. In essence, when a buyer signs the

that will benefit you. For example, you can

mortgage, he or she is saying, “If I do not

put special clauses in your mortgage that will

perform according to the terms of the note,

the

property

being

financed

then you can take back the property.”
126

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

When there is no cash given as a down payment, the seller
may be concerned that if the property was damaged, they could
lose money. The property itself may not be able to satisfy the debt.
If you give them something extra, like a lien on one of your other
properties, they may feel more secure knowing the extra collateral
will give them some cushion. The note stays the same; only the
mortgage or deed of trust is changed.
Most of the time, however, you will have a seller who wants
some cash in their pocket. Now you have to find out what the
needs of the seller are.
	Does the seller need some cash right now? Or does the seller
feel that if you have a vested interest in the property, you will take
better care of it and make the monthly payments? In other words, is
the seller just looking for security?
	If the seller needs cash and wants a hefty down payment,
maybe the seller could subordinate his position, allowing you to
get a first mortgage with a lender and have the seller hold a second
mortgage. See the example below.
FOR EXAMPLE
asking price
seller willing to carry
down payment
you offer
give seller
seller will carry

$100K
$80K mortgage
$20K
$100K
$40K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
$60K 2nd mortgage

If the seller needs security, knowing that he received more money
up front may help alleviate some of his fears. In this case, you
may offer to give the seller more money and have him carry less.

127

See the example below.

the purchase price and the assumable
mortgage. But when the mortgage is not

FOR EXAMPLE
asking price
seller willing to carry
down payment
you offer
give seller
seller will carry

$100K
$80K mortgage
$20K
$100K
$60K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
$40K 2nd mortgage

assumable or when qualification by a new
buyer is required in order for an assumption
to take place, there will be an acceleration
clause in the mortgage that states if the
property is sold, the lender has the right to

If the seller is not comfortable in holding a

demand payment of the remaining principal

lien in second position, then maybe you can

balance. This is sometimes referred to as the

give the seller even more cash and have

“due-on-sale clause.” In other words, if the

a much lower mortgage. See the example

title is transferred, the bank may decide to

below. If the seller is still concerned about

“call the loan due.”

holding a note in second position, you will

Back in the ’70s when interest rates

need to try to find out what will work for the

began skyrocketing, people started having

seller and still get you what you want. We

trouble selling their homes. So sellers had to

will explore other options that may be more

get creative. They started letting more buyers

appealing to the seller shortly.

assume their mortgages or they created

FOR EXAMPLE
asking price
seller willing to carry
down payment
you offer
give seller
seller will carry

wraparound mortgages. The banks wanted
$100K
$80K mortgage
$20K
$100K
$75K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
$25K 2nd mortgage

the money that had been locked into low
interest loans to be available to lend at the
higher market interest rates. The acceleration
clause (a.k.a., due-on-sale clause) was a
way of eliminating low interest loans and

Due-On-Sale Clause and Land Trusts
Sometimes the seller has a mortgage on the
property, but they may still be willing to work
with you on the financing. If the mortgage
is assumable and does not require a new
buyer to qualify, then you can assume the
mortgage and ask the seller to carry a
second mortgage for the difference between
128

freeing up money to lend at the higher rates.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

Wraparound Mortgages
Wraparound mortgages are an important tool in buying houses
when there is an existing mortgage on the property. A wrap is a
seller carry back loan that surrounds (or wraps) already existing
financing. It enables the buyer to obtain financing without paying
off the existing loan.
The buyer’s mortgage and payments are based on the terms
of the wrap, such as interest and timeframe, and have nothing to
do with existing financing. The seller keeps the difference between
what he or she receives from the buyer and the mortgage payment
of the existing financing.
To illustrate, let’s say you negotiate to purchase a house for
$130,000. The seller is willing to do a wrap mortgage for the
full purchase price at 10% interest amortized over 30 years. The
seller’s existing loan is based on an original loan of $80,000 at 7%
interest amortized over 30 years. The seller has owned the property
for 10 years.
This is how it looks:
• $130,000 at 10% interest amortized over 30 years =
$1,140.84 per month
• $80,000 at 7% interest amortized over 30 years = $532.24
per month.
Each month, the seller will receive $608.60 more than his or her
mortgage payment. At the end of 20 years, the seller will keep the
full $1,140.84 per month until the principal is paid off in 10 years.

129

	In essence, a wrap allows the buyer to
take title to a property by combining a first
mortgage and a second mortgage where

other low or no money
down techniques

the second mortgage wraps around the
first. Sometimes it is called an all-inclusive
mortgage (AIM) or an all-inclusive trust deed
(AITD).
Land Contract, Contract for
Deed, and Agreement for Deed
The terms land contract, contract for deed,
and agreement for deed essentially mean the
same thing: a promise to pay. Until the debt
is paid, the seller retains title and the buyer
receives an equitable interest in the property.
The buyer does not become the

Assume first mortgage and have
the seller carry a second
One no money down technique is to assume
the first mortgage and have the seller carry
a second. Often, there is a huge difference
between what you have negotiated with the
seller as a purchase price and the assumable
loan he or she has. This difference can
empty your pockets quickly or put the deal
too far out of reach. Ask the owner to carry
a second mortgage for the difference.

titleholder until the terms of the contract are

Owner takes back a note

satisfied, at which time the seller actually

Another technique is to have the owner

deeds the property to the buyer.

take back a note for a short period of time,

	A contract sale is handled by an

allowing you to get a refinance loan instead

escrow company that holds the Warranty

of a purchase loan. A refinance is based on

Deed signed by the seller until the buyer

the appraised value and not the purchase

satisfies the terms of the contract.

price, so if you are buying below appraised

	One benefit of using land contracts

value, you can get into the property with no

or contract for deed is they can be used

money down. It can have interest accruing

as a tool to avoid the due-on-sale clause,

and mortgage payments or no payments

since title does not transfer until the terms

and a balloon. However, you need to use

are satisfied. Another benefit is there are

caution when using this technique. Ensure

minimum closing costs involved because

you have a lender who can refinance

owner financing is used.

quickly without seasoning and one who will
base that refinance on appraised value even

130

though you have not owned the property for
very long.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

Split funding
With split funding, the investor offers a small amount of cash to
close the deal, with the remaining amount due months later. No
interest is paid and only one lump sum payment is due. Basically, it
is a way of getting in with no down payment or with very little down
and then having a balloon payment of the principal due later, such
as in six months.
The term is negotiable, but enables the investor to fix up the
property and have it sold or refinanced before the balloon is due.
The advantage to the seller is that a distressed property gets fixed
up and the seller gets his or her money no later than when the
balloon payment comes due.
Balloon the down payment
This is similar to split funding, but you give no cash. Instead, you ask
the seller if he or she will carry the note and wait six months or longer
for the down payment. You will be making mortgage payments each
month, which may relieve the owner of debt if it is a wrap mortgage
or of management woes if the seller owns it free and clear. This can
also solve problems the owner may have if they live out of state.
	Additionally, this will give you time to come up with the money
if you plan to sell the property and thus pay off the debt and pocket
the difference. Or if you are planning on keeping the property, you
can possibly use the extra money from the rents (your positive cash
flow) to come up with the down payment, or you may decide to
refinance.
Pay the down payment in installments
You can ask the seller to let you pay the down payment in terms. The
payments can be made over several months or years. Of course,
if you are keeping the property for income, you will want to make
sure it still has cash flow.
131

Subordination

pulling cash out for future investing or to pay

Subordination is simply moving a senior

off the loan that was placed on an existing

loan to junior position. It allows you to get

property you own.

a new mortgage, even though you already
have seller financing in place. In other
words, subordination occurs when the seller
agrees to take back a second mortgage and
allows you to get a first new mortgage on
the property. IIt works best with properties
carrying low or no mortgages.
Why are sellers willing to subordinate?
You may find an extremely motivated seller.
Perhaps they have a distressed property they
cannot sell. Or they may get more money
from you with subordination than they would
get if they sold the property “all cash” to
some other buyer. Remember, the sales price
can sometimes mean more to the seller than
cash.
Substitution of collateral
Substitution of collateral simply means you are
taking an existing mortgage on one property
and you are transferring it to another. In other
words, you are substituting the collateral from
one property to another. This can work for a
down payment or can be used to purchase
the property. In using substitution of collateral
to purchase the property, you will now own
it free and clear. You can then refinance it,

132

Joint venture with the seller
Some deal types may not allow for this and
it is recommended that you consult your local attorney for specific laws and regulations in
your area.
Ask the seller to let you help sell his or her
property and split the profit between you.
If there is a lot of equity or you can force
the appreciation by doing a little repair, you
and the seller can make some good money.
Make sure you have a contract that states
how much the split is and the terms you have
negotiated for your protection.
Joint venture with an investor
Let’s say you find a phenomenal deal, but
you are strapped for money. You could
bring in another investor to be the money
partner. Often, in the commercial arena, an
investor will bring in several other investors
to purchase high rises, etc.
Partners
When using partners, you need to have
all your numbers worked out and the entire
deal planned very carefully. It is customary
to split the profit equally, but sometimes you
may do a 40/60 or 30/70 deal.

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

	How do you find a partner? Attend your local real estate
investment group or advertise in the newspaper.
Important Note: When using a partner, be sure to consult with an
attorney. It may not be in your best interest to create a partnership.
Many people have been hurt as the result of a partner incurring
litigation, and having judgments attached to them and their assets
because of the partnership. It is usually best to keep them as a
money partner where both of you are placed on the deed. This
way, when the property is sold, you both will receive your portion
of the profit.
Raise the price and lower the terms
To make seller financing work, particularly with no down payment,
you can offer to pay more money than the seller is asking. This may
appeal to a seller who is more concerned with price than the terms
and doesn’t really need the cash.
Lower the price and raise the interest rate
This is often used to appeal to an investor who wants a higher
interest rate and sees the potential of making more money if the note
is carried over a long term. This is beneficial to you because your
interest payments are tax deductible, and if you do sell the property,
you owe less because of the lower price (you have more equity in
the property). Again, knowing the needs or desires of the seller can
help you create the optimum win/win situation.
Assume the seller’s obligations
Instead of giving cash for a down payment, you can assume the
seller’s financial obligations. If the seller has a payment they need
to make, you could make the payment and count that as your down
payment. Or maybe you could take over a credit card bill and
spread the down payment over several months or years.
133

Get a line of credit

The advantage of a line of credit is

There are many different types of lines of

that if you need only $5,000 for a down

credit. You may have a strong portfolio with

payment or for repair costs and pull out just

your bank and can get an unsecured line of

the $5,000, you will only pay interest on

credit.

that $5,000. If you then pay the $5,000

	Another line of credit is one that is

back, you will have no interest accruing,

secured. Possibly you have a large sum

but will still have access to up to $30,000

in the bank and you borrow against that

whenever you need it!

amount. This may freeze up your account,
but it can prove valuable in building a strong

Trade for the down payment

relationship with your bank for future lines

Trade something you already own that has

of credit that won’t be secured. It can also

value for the down payment. You may have

improve your credit as the bank reports your

something of value the seller would happily

good payment history to credit bureaus.

take as a down payment. It could be

	Another secured line of credit may be

something as simple as a boat or a vehicle.

taken on a property you own. This could

It may be a rundown property a motivated

be your personal residence, or it may be

seller deeded to you. Finding the needs of

another investment property you own. It is

your seller will allow you to find creative

usually called an equity loan and is based

solutions to fund the deal.

on the equity you have in the property.
	For instance, if you own a property

Use equity on an existing property

worth $100,000 and owe $50,000, the

You may own a property that has a lot of

lender may give you $30,000 in a line of

equity. Many investors will refinance that

credit, which becomes a second mortgage.

property and pull out the equity to be used

You will then have the option of pulling out

as down payments or to pay cash for the

all of the $30,000 at once, or you will be

next deal, and then refinance that property

given checks to use as needed.

after it has been fixed up if they plan to keep
it. Or they will sell the property and then use
the excess proceeds to buy again.

134

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

Buy low and refinance to pull your cash out
If you have cash, you may want to buy low and refinance to pull
out your cash. But if you want to go this route, remember that some
lenders may require seasoning.
	Over the years, lenders were hurt by unscrupulous investors
who would purchase a property, do shabby repairs, and then sell
the property for more than the value using an appraiser who overinflated the appraisal. So many lenders started requiring seasoning.
You may still find some lenders who don’t have an issue with
seasoning, but before you pay cash, make sure you can refinance
quickly if that is your plan.
Use hard money
Hard moneylenders are a critical element to you being able to have
quick access to cash. Liquidity can make the difference between
getting the deal and losing it. Quick closings can also help you
negotiate much lower prices. They are also vital for an investor who
does not have good credit.
	Hard moneylenders usually base the loan on the property itself,
not your creditworthiness. Because they lend at a low LTV, they have
less risk. If you don’t make the payments, they simply take the property
and sell it.
	As already discussed, we can find hard moneylenders through
mortgage brokers, but there are other ways to find these private
investors. For instance, you can check the courthouse for private
note holders. If you consistently see a name that doesn’t look like an
institutional lender, you have probably found a hard moneylender.
Don’t be confused if the note holder is in the name of a Corporation
or LLC. Most investors who lend money will use one of these entities.

135

136

	You can also find hard moneylenders

factor in all the costs of the loan and can still

through your local real estate investment club

make money, why wouldn’t you use a hard

and through other networking opportunities.

moneylender? Most investors who plan to

For example, network with other investors you

do rehabs will use a hard moneylender.

meet when attending auctions and calling the

	As mentioned before, hard money-

“I buy” ads in the newspaper. You may come

lenders are private investors. They lend at

across a hard moneylender or someone who

a much higher interest rate, As mentioned

can refer you to a good one.

before, hard money lenders are private

	Other sources for finding hard money

investors who lend at higher interest rates

include professionals associated with the real

and

estate business. For example, accountants

remember one point equals one percent of

and CPAs have clients who are looking to

the loan amount.

invest their money. They may already have

	You would want to pay a higher interest

clients who hold one or more notes. Likewise,

rate with lower points than a lower interest

insurance agents have to put the lender on

rate with high points. For example, if you

hazard insurance policies. If you know an

were to get a loan at 18% interest and 2

agent, maybe they would look through

points that you had for six months, your cost

their records to find the private lenders. Title

for the loan would be 1-1/2% per month X

companies and closing attorneys prepare

6 months (equals 9% + 2 points = 11%). If

closing documents for private moneylenders.

you were to get a loan at 12% interest and

Most should be able to give you at least one

10 points for the same period of time, your

source for hard money.

cost for this loan would be 16% (1% per

	You can also look in the newspaper

month X 6 months equals 6% + 10 points =

for hard moneylenders. Often, you can

16%).

find people wanting to lend money in the

	You may consider negotiating with the

classified ads of the newspaper under the

seller to pay the points. This could potentially

financial, business, or real estate section.

save you money, but it really is the same

Sometimes they may appear as “loan

as getting the seller to accept a lower

sharks.” Remember, it is not the cost of the

purchase price. However, you will find that

money, but the availability of the money that

for some sellers, this is preferable to actually

makes hard money so appealing. If you

accepting a lower price. The reason is they

typically

charge

points.

Again,

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

may not want to tell family members they accepted the lower price,
when in fact they would accept less money.
This is something you may want to explore as you negotiate
with the seller. The benefit of having a higher price for you is that it
may be easier to turn around and sell the property for more money
if it appears the purchase price was higher.
Most hard money loans are short-term loans of six months to one
year. The investor wants to get in and out quickly. They make their
money on the points and when this money is freed up, they can
lend it out again. They also want less risk and a short period of time
fits their risk tolerance. Nevertheless, you may want to ask them if
there is a prepayment penalty if you pay the loan off early. There
probably won’t be, but it never hurts to ask.
Wanting to protect their interest, hard moneylenders will usually
lend 60 to 75% of the after-repair value. They usually do their own
drive-bys to ascertain the value of the property, but they may use
someone else, an appraiser or someone they trust, to assess the
ARV for them.
	After you have established a good relationship with a hard
moneylender and they feel you know what you are doing, some
will put the money in your bank account within 24 hours. This will
enable you to take advantage of foreclosure auctions and other
deals that may need quick cash. And for those of you who may
have trouble getting a loan through an institution because of credit
issues, a hard moneylender can give you a pre-qualification letter,
enabling you to make offers on bank owned properties and to
sellers who insist on having a pre-qualification letter.
The bottom line is every investor should have at least one hard
moneylender in their pocket!

137

Sell off part of the property

The disadvantage is if you want to

Sometimes you will buy a property that can

sell one of the properties. To do so, you

be split into several useful parts. You can sell

will need the lender to release it (usually

off part of the land or some of the houses

they will for a price) or you will need to

and use the profit from that sale to make

refinance. It is imperative that you get a

your down payment on another sale.

partial release clause put into the mortgage

	For example, let’s say you are buying

contract to protect yourself (consult with a

six houses at $25,000 each. You negotiate

lawyer). This clause permits the borrower to

a 60-day close and you need 20% down.

obtain a release of any one lot or parcel

You sell two of the houses for $40,000

from the lien by repaying a certain amount

each. At the simultaneous closings, you

of the loan. The lien will stay in place on the

make your down payment of $30,000 from

remaining properties.

the profit you made from the sale of the two

	Another reason you may want a

houses.

blanket mortgage is because once you have
multiple loans, it becomes harder to get a

Blanket mortgage

loan. By combining several properties you

A blanket loan covers more than one parcel

are purchasing, you will have less loans on

or lot. It is usually used to finance subdivision

the books.

developments. However, it can be used to

	Sometimes a lender will insist upon

finance the purchase of any kind of property.

a blanket mortgage to reduce their risk.

Blanket mortgages are used for multiple

They lend you the money to purchase the

reasons. For example, some lenders have a

property, but they want to attach the loan

minimum amount they are willing to lend. If

to the one purchased and a property you

the house you want to purchase is less than

already own! Be careful. This is not a good

what they are willing to lend, you may want

loan for you.

to combine one or more properties in a loan

When

you

are

filling

out

loan

that blankets them.

applications, you need to be cautious. You

The advantage of a blanket loan is that you

have to show your debts, so those properties

usually pay less in closing costs (one closing

you have loans on will show up. But the

for several properties).

properties you have purchased without
institutional lending will not show up on your

138

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

credit report. Even though they have equity, you may not want to list
them as an asset. The lender may want to attach them into a blanket
mortgage.
Making the seller your partner
Equity participation is when you make the seller your partner by
giving them an interest in the property. For example, if your down
payment was to be 20%, you can give the seller an equitable
interest in the property of 20% instead of having to come up with the
down payment. When you sell the property, the seller gets 20% of
what the property sells for. To illustrate, if you purchased a property
for $100,000, you would get a mortgage of $80,000 and give
the seller a 20% interest in the property. Let’s say that after two
years, you sell the property for $150,000. The seller would receive
$30,000 ($10,000 plus his initial $20,000) and you would profit
$40,000! Win/win!
Equity partnership
This is similar to the equity participation made when the seller was
your partner, but in this case, you make someone else your equity
partner.
	Let’s say you are purchasing a property worth $180,000 for
$120,000. Your lender requires $24,000 for a down payment.
	You know your dad has been complaining about the low
interest rate he has been receiving on his savings at the bank and
that he is interested in doing some real estate investing. You sell him
an equity share in the house. He has $12,000, so you give him a
10% share of the house.
You also have a couple of sisters who have expressed an interest
in doing some investing. You ask them how much they can invest.

139

	One sister has $9,600, so you give

taking back a note could close the deal.

her an 8% share in the house. Your other

	Also, if the owner does 100% financing,

sister who just got a bonus from work has

he or she may be unable to pay the agent

$2,400 to invest. You give her a 2% share in

because of lack of funds. You can always

the property. Now you have your $24,000

ask!

for the down payment and your family owns
20% of the house.

Closing strategies on cash flow

	You purchase the house and sell it for

properties

$180,000. You will have $60,000 profit

On income-producing properties, setting

from the sale. Your dad gets $6,000 (plus

the closing date between the 3rd and 5th

his initial investment of $12,000); your

day of the month can help you produce the

sister who had an 8% share in the home

down payment you need.

receives $4,800 (plus her initial investment

	At closing, you would get most of the

of $9,600); and the sister with the bonus has

rent for that month, plus the deposit and the

made $1,200 on her initial investment of

last month’s rent. Taxes are usually prorated

$2,400. And you have made a handsome

and the real estate tax credit could also help

profit of $48,000!

with the down. But be aware that in some

	Do you think your family might want

states, the deposit is held in escrow and you

to do this again? Do you think they may

don’t collect the last month’s rent.

spread the word and you will have a lot

	Find out what is applicable for you

more people wanting to own a share in the

where you live. Sometimes the lender wants

equity of a house?

to see proof of funds and you have to bring

	Ask the agent to take back a note for

money to the closing table, but you can

his commission.

put money back in your pocket afterwards.

	Some real estate agents may be willing

With seller financing, you will not have to

to take back a note for their commission,

worry about proof of funds.

particularly if they are having trouble selling

140

the property. Most of them realize something

Create a note and sell it

is better than nothing. If their commission

There are many ways to create a note and

would be the down payment you need, then

many different types of notes. For example,

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

when a seller carries the financing, a promissory note is created
with the buyer promising to pay the debt and the terms of the note.
A mortgage or deed of trust is created as a security instrument using
the property as collateral for the debt. When a seller holds the
“mortgage” or “takes back a note,” the seller is holding a promissory
note and a mortgage or deed of trust.
These notes and the security instrument can be sold to an
investor. There are note buyers all over the country who buy notes
on a daily basis. Most notes are sold at a discount, which is one of
the ways a note buyer makes his or her money.
There are many factors that affect the value of the note. The primary
factors are:
• The interest rate – The higher the
interest rate, the more valuable the
note and the higher the yield.
• The credit of the borrower – 			
The better the credit, the more the
note buyer will pay for the note.
• Timeframe – The shorter the term,
the more they will pay for the note. If
it needs to be amortized over 30
years, then create a balloon in 10
years. Note buyers like to get in and
out quickly. Since they buy at a
discount, they make money when they
buy.

141

• How old is the

	You can get creative working with notes.

note? – They like notes

For example, you could sell a “partial” note

to be “seasoned” one to two years. A

(selling part of the payments for your down

seasoned note shows a payment

payment). To illustrate, let’s say you make

history and provides less risk to the

an offer on a property for $150,000. The

note buyer.

seller owns it free and clear and is willing to
carry the financing with 20% down at 10%

•	LTV – How much is the loan to value?

interest amortized over 30 years. You offer

	Note buyers want to see some equity

to give the seller the $30,000 cash down

in the property.

payment he wants if he is willing to give
up the first 28 monthly payments. You show

• What position is the note? – 		 him how this will make him more money.
Typically they want a note that is in

Here is how you get the $30,000 for the

first position.

down and convince the seller to carry the
financing:

• What kind of property,
	condition, and location? –

Create a $150,000 note at 10% interest

They will take these factors into

= $1316.36 monthly payments. You

consideration.

are going to sell off the first 28 months
of payments for $30,937.77. This will

These variables will affect how much the

give the investor who purchases the note

note is discounted and therefore the value of

$36,858.08 – a yield of 15%! From the

the note (what the note buyer ultimately will

$30,937.77, you will give the seller the

pay). Many investors will work with a seller

$30,000 down payment.

to create a note that is sold at the same

142

time the property is closed on and the seller

After 28 payments, the mortgage reverts

gets cash at closing. This is a simultaneous

back to the owner. At this time there is a

close and even though it doesn’t have any

principal balance of $147,916.97. The

seasoning, this technique can be valuable

seller already collected $30,000 and still

to the investor buying the property.

has 332 months of payments coming!

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

If you added the principal balance of $147,916.97 to the $30,000
down payment, the owner has already made $27,916.97 in
addition to the remaining payments he will be receiving. Even if
you sold the property or refinanced it at this point, the owner will
have made $27,916.97 above the purchase price!
	If you continue making mortgage payments, the owner will
make $263.27 more per month than if you were paying on a
$120,000 note ($150,000 purchase price minus $30,000
down = $120,000 note at 10% interest = $1053.09 monthly
payments). You have just created a win/win situation!
Make sure that when you sign the purchase contract, you put
in the contingency: “Sale is subject to buyer selling 28 monthly
payments at $1316.36 for a minimum of $30,000.” Your lawyer
can help you with contingencies. The note sale will take place
simultaneously with the purchase of the property giving the seller the
$30,000 down payment.
1031 Tax Exchange
In layman’s terms, a 1031 Tax Exchange allows an investor to pull
his profit from one or more real estate properties to purchase other
property without it becoming a taxable event.
	An exchange occurs when an investor buys and sells a property
simultaneously to defer capital gains tax. Capital gains tax can be
permanently deferred as long as an outright sale does not occur.
The properties have to be like-kind. All real estate is considered to
be like-kind.

143

Qualifications of a 1031 Exchange include:

Grants
There are many federal, state, and city

• Must use a qualified Intermediary
(Exchanger) that is unrelated

grants available depending on where you
live and what you want to do. For example,
the government offers several grants for

• The seller must identify the property he

property

improvements

and

property

or she plans to purchase within 45

development that is intended to help low-

days of closing

income families or the elderly. And there are
grants available for rehabilitating specific

• The property must be purchased within

geographical areas.
Talk to bankers, real estate agents, and

180 days of closing

your city to see if they know of any grants
• The replacement property has to be

available and contact your local housing

the same or more than the property

authority to find out how government grant

being sold

programs work. You should also network
with investors who do rehabs or provide

• The replacement property must be held
for a minimum of two years

housing for the low-income population.
	You’ll also want to check with the
federal government. You can go to the

There are many things you can do when you

hud.gov website and look up the grants

implement a 1031 Exchange. For example,

that are available there. HUD (Department

other investors may sell several properties

of

at once to purchase a large commercial

provides numerous grants for neighborhood

building using a 1031 Exchange. Consult

revitalization. Additionally, the USDA (U.S.

with a tax professional for assistance with

Department of Agriculture) provides loans

1031 Exchanges.

and grants for rural multi-family housing for

Housing

and

Urban

Development)

low-income individuals.
Try to locate a government grant and
loan specialist to help you take advantage
of the various grants available.

144

Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing

Options/straight options
An option is basically securing the right to purchase a property
up to a certain time period for a specific price. There is usually
consideration money given that can be non-refundable. You are
paying for the right to tie up the property for a period of time for an
agreed upon price. The seller cannot sell the property to anyone
else during this time. You are not obligated to purchase the property;
you just have the right to purchase it for a certain period of time.
Sometimes this is called a straight option.
	Straight options are commonly used by developers purchasing
raw ground and by those investing in commercial properties. These
developers and investors don’t want to purchase a property only
to find out that after they have run tests and feasibility studies, they
cannot build on the property or that it is not suited for what they
want to do. Sometimes they have to get zoning changes. At the
same time, they don’t want to spend all this time and money doing
their due diligence only to find out the owner sold the property to
someone else.
When it comes to houses, most people only think of lease
option. But you can sometimes secure a straight option on a house
and assign the option for a fee. Sometimes you will find a motivated
seller who has not been able to sell the home. You know it is because
the seller lacks the marketing skills and you feel you could sell this
property quickly. Using an option would allow you to do just that.

145

Sandwich lease options

REVIEW

A sandwich lease option is where you buy

There are probably a thousand and one

with a lease option and then sell with a lease

ways to creatively purchase real estate. But

option. You are essentially sandwiched

the first step in creative financing is solving

between two lease options.

the problems of your motivated seller.

Many investors like the sandwich

Become a problem solver! This is an

lease option because you can usually get

essential component in real estate investing.

in with minimal cash (usually $100) and

Think creatively as you attempt to satisfy the

receive from your tenant/buyer 3 to 5% of

needs of your seller.

the purchase price in option consideration

	Strive to produce a win/win situation at

money. At the same time, you can have

every opportunity. Sellers will work with you

positive cash flow.

if they feel you can satisfy their needs and

The

properties

involved

in

lease

options are usually nice homes in great
neighborhoods. We will learn more about
lease options in the next chapter. Be sure
to look into the laws of your state regarding
lease options.
Assignment of contract
We discussed assignment of contracts in our
chapter on wholesaling, but, as a reminder,
with an assignment of contract, you never
purchase the property. You get the property
under contract and either assign the contract
or do a double closing. This is quick money
with limited risk. You don’t have to get a
loan or rehab the property because you
are not purchasing the property. You find
a great deal and wholesale it to another
investor who does all the work.
146

help them with their problem. Be creative.

chapter
eight

147

Important Note:
Be sure you contact your local real estate professional or real estate lawyer to research the appropriate documents
that are required for all real estate transactions in your state.

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

profiting by
controlling
property:
Lease Options
A

		 n option is a contract that

ground only to find out it cannot be

		 gives you the right to purchase

built on or that approvals to subdivide

a property for an agreed upon price

the property won’t go through. By the

up to a certain timeframe. This is

same token, the builder does not want

called a “straight” option. This kind

to pay a lot of money doing perk tests

of transaction is called a unilateral

and feasibility tests only to find out

contract because only the seller is

the seller sold the property to someone

bound by it. An option obligates the

else. So the builder uses a straight

seller, but not the buyer. The buyer has

option, an important element of which

the “right” to purchase the property,

is consideration. The builder gives the

but does not have to.

seller consideration (usually money)

	As we learned earlier, a straight

that is frequently non-refundable for the

option is frequently used by developers

right to tie up the property and lock

and buyers of commercial property. A

in a purchase price. Another way of

builder does not want to purchase raw

thinking about consideration is that it
149

is money the buyer pays to the seller to
have the right to purchase the property at a
later date.

elements of a standard
option contract

	Investors will use a straight option to
hold on to a property for future appreciation.
They know the potential of the area and want
to lock in at today’s value. Other investors
will get an option and sell the contract to
another investor.
	You may find a homeowner who has
a property he wants to sell, but is having
trouble selling. You know you could sell the
property quickly because you know how to
market a property and attract buyers. So,
you get an option to purchase the property
and start marketing it for sale. Why would
the seller do this? Because the seller got the
price he wanted and you are willing to do
all the work.
The idea here is that an option gives
you control of the property without you
having to purchase it.
	It is creative financing! You can make
a profit without using any of your money.
You can quick-turn a property and make fast
cash just like when you wholesale a deal!

Elements you will always see in an option
contract include:
The contract must be in writing
As with all real estate contracts, an option
must be in writing. A handshake or verbal
agreement is not enough. You must have all
parties on the title sign the option contract
and date it. Be sure to check the title so you
know who will need to sign the contract.
Who are the individuals involved? Who is
the buyer and who is the seller?
Location of the property
If the property has an address, write it
down. It wouldn’t hurt to also put the parcel
identification number in the contract. If it is
raw ground, you may also want to put the
legal description of the property in addition
to the PIN number.
Consideration
The amount of the consideration will be in
the option contract. This is what makes the
contract a legal, binding contract. Usually
the consideration is money, but it can be
whatever the buyer and seller agree to.

150

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

When you are the buyer, you will want to pay as little as possible
(perhaps as little as $10). But when you are the seller, you will want
your tenant/buyer to pay three to five percent of the property’s
purchase price.
Timeframe
A specified timeframe is written into the option contract that gives
the buyer a period of time to exercise the option. This timeframe will
have a date. Any time up to that date, the buyer may exercise his
option. This means that even though the buyer may have a five-year
option, he can exercise it any time before that date. If he decides
to purchase the property six months into the option, there is nothing
stopping him from exercising the option and buying the property.
Purchase price
In the option contract, it will state the agreed upon price.

what is a lease option?

Just as the name implies, a lease option incorporates two components:
an option (the right to purchase the property for a specific price
for a certain period of time) and a lease agreement. You have
probably heard the term “rent to own,” which is what most people
call a lease option. Negotiated in the contract are the particulars of
the terms that have been agreed upon.
	A lease option is an excellent tool in controlling real estate
and creating wealth. Gaining control over a property with relatively
no risk empowers an investor and opens up immense opportunities
for obtaining properties with very little money.
Lease option vs. lease purchase
151

There is a big difference between

• Additional

Monthly

Option

a lease option and a lease purchase. A

Consideration – Many investors will

lease purchase obligates the tenant/buyer

charge more money for rent and give a

(lessee) to buy the property within the term

credit towards the purchase if the option

of the lease, whereas a lease option gives

is exercised. If you do this, be careful to

the tenant/buyer the right, or option, to buy

not call it “credit” in your contract as this

the property and the seller (lessor) must sell.

may give the tenant/buyer an equitable

With a lease option, the tenant/buyer

position in the property.

is not required to exercise the option and
therefore is not obligated to purchase the

• Maintenance – Usually there is

property. With a lease purchase, however,

something in the contract that states who

the tenant/buyer is obligated to purchase

pays when something needs work.

the property. As a buyer, we only want to
do lease options.
	Another term you should not be confused

benefits of a lease option

with is purchase option. A purchase option
refers to purchasing the property with the

There are benefits in a lease option to

exit strategy of selling it on a lease option.

both the buyer and the seller. Let’s explore

Additional components of a lease option

the benefits and then see how those same

	You will have the same elements in a

benefits will help you as an investor.

lease option contract as you would in a
standard option contract, however, you must

Benefits as a buyer

additionally have:

The advantage of a lease option to a buyer
who cannot qualify for a loan to purchase a

• Lease Payments – Specified in the

property is that it gives him the opportunity

contract will be the amount of the rent

to become a homeowner.

and when the rent is due.

	As the buyer works to build his credit,
most lenders consider a lease option as

152

• Term of the Lease – How long the

though the buyer was actually purchasing

lease is for and if it can be renewed.

the property. Often, they will do a refinance

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

instead of a purchase loan. Usually the buyer can refinance on
appraised value after six months. Also, prompt payments on a lease
option by the buyer can help him qualify for a loan easier than if he
had just been renting. A lease option can also benefit a buyer who
does not have a lot of money for a down payment.
	As an investor/buyer, you will gain financial leverage with
a lease option while your risk is reduced. You can control a very
expensive and potentially profitable home with very little money of
your own and without owning it.
Many of these properties would normally require 10 to 30%
of the purchase price down. Option consideration money is small
compared to the property’s value and the costs that would have
been involved had you secured a loan.
	Even if you could get a loan, it’s much better to make money
without loans. You can walk away from the contract if the property
value goes down. You control the property.
	You will accumulate equity faster than you would through
conventional financing. This makes it even easier for you to “buy
right.” Because you are not getting financing and don’t “own” the
property, there will be no public record (other than a Memorandum
of Option).
	You will also have increased buying power. You can get into
a lease option with as little as $10 consideration money when you
have a motivated seller who needs debt relief.
	Additionally, you will not have the property showing up as a
debt on your credit report. This, in itself, will help you be able to do
other types of transactions without this particular investment creating
an adverse effect.
	As a buyer, you want to make sure the contract is assignable.
You may decide to just assign the contract. Sometimes this is called
an assignment option. You can assign a straight option or a lease
option. You could even “wholesale” a lease option!
153

Some investors will use a lease option to

a house that is worth between $110,000

allow them to gain control of the property

and $116,000 according to the comps. If

and fix it up. They either sell it with a double

houses were appreciating at 8% per year

close or bring it to a point where they can

and you gave your tenant/buyer a two-year

now obtain the financing based on the

option to purchase the property, your asking

appraised value of the home.

price would be $135,000 ($116,000 X

	You will find investors will also purchase

1.08 = $125,280 X 1.08 = $135,302.40).

rental units using a lease option. They get

As a seller, you will typically ask for 3 to 5% of

in for relatively little money and can fix

the purchase price in non-refundable option

these units up and increase rents, thereby

consideration money. In our example, you

forcing appreciation. Now the property will

would ask between $4,000 and $6,750.

appraise much higher and they will likely

If the buyer’s credit was horrible, you might

have no difficulty in refinancing the property

want to get even more.

and possibly pulling cash out (making sure

	You can generate more cash flow as

they still have a positive cash flow)!

you can charge higher than fair market rent.

	A lease option requires very little or

With the higher rental fee, some investors

no money and offers investors a quick and

will give credit towards the purchase price.

productive way of generating income.

Again, if you do, remember to be careful that
you call it additional option consideration,

Benefits as a seller

not credit in your contracts. You must always

As a seller, one of the advantages of a lease

be careful to not give equitable interest in the

option is you can sell the property quickly.

property. If your tenant(s) default, it is hard to

This is beneficial especially in areas that

evict them if they have equitable interest. At

are experiencing a sluggish economy and

that point, you might have to foreclose.

where sellers have to wait a long time to get

Another benefit as a seller is you have a

their houses sold. You have a great pool of

guaranteed rental income. If the buyer is

buyers when you do a lease option.

ever late, the option is void. This is a great

With a lease option, you can ask top

154

incentive for your tenant/buyer to make

prices and get them. Typically, investors will

payments on time.

charge the higher market value and then

	Additionally, maintenance is not a

add for appreciation. An example would be

problem. Anything under $500, your

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

tenant/buyer will have to pay for (stipulate this in your agreement).
Usually, the tenant/buyer (optionee) will take better care of the
property than a traditional tenant would. They now have the pride
of homeownership, which will help free up your time from property
management issues. And vacancies are rare. If the tenant/buyer
moves out, you get to keep the consideration money.
	You collect non-refundable option consideration upfront.
Option money is tax deferred until the option is exercised and sold,
or forfeited. That means you have tax-deferred money you can use
for other properties you wish to invest in. You remain on the deed
and maintain all the tax benefits of ownership.
	As you can see, there are many advantages to doing a lease
option for both the buyer and the seller.

buying and selling with a lease option

Buy with a lease option
Some investors will purchase a property using a lease option. They
take control of the property without the financial stress of large
down payments or having to qualify for a loan. Then, they rent the
property out and receive a positive monthly cash flow.
When it comes time for them to exercise their option, the
property has increased in value and they qualify for a loan with no
extra money out of their pocket. Or, they can simply walk away and
not purchase the property.
Sell with a lease option
Other investors have purchased a home and fixed it up. They want
a monthly income, but don’t want to become landlords. They sell
using a lease option, knowing they will get more than the property is
155

worth today and have a nice cash flow with
a tenant/buyer who will take good care
of the property. They also get some upfront
money from the option consideration.

1

		You receive a non-refundable deposit
		 collected from your tenant/buyer –
Quick money like wholesale!

2

		You

Sandwich lease option
Then there are investors who purchase using

have

a

monthly

income

		 (difference between your payment
and what you receive from your tenant/

a lease option and then turn around and sell

buyer) – Positive cash flow like a rental!

the same property using a lease option. As

are “sandwiched” in between two lease

3

options, one with you as the buyer and the

you receive from your tenant/buyer) – Large

other with you as the seller.

profit like retailing (buy, fix, and sell)!

we learned earlier, this technique is known
as a sandwich lease option where you

		You receive money at the backend
		 (difference between the option price
you have with the seller and the option price

Sandwich lease options are great profit
centers. Understanding the mechanics of a

As you can see, you can make quick money

sandwich lease option will not only increase

doing a sandwich lease option, just as you

your ability to find deals and make money,

can when you wholesale a property. The big

but you will also be able to just “buy” using

difference is instead of looking for distressed

a lease option or just “sell” using a lease

or “ugly” houses, you will be looking for nice

option. Sandwich lease options will be the

homes in nice areas. For many investors, this

focus of the rest of this section.

makes lease options more attractive.

	Sandwich lease options are one of the

	You probably noticed that you would

best moneymaking tools in real estate. There

also receive monthly income, just like if

are three ways you get paid when you do a

you were doing a rental, except with

sandwich lease option:

considerably less headaches. And you
can see more profit at the backend without
having to spend a lot of time and effort
rehabbing a property and trying to sell it, so
you escape the risk of time and capital often
associated with investing in rehabs.

156

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

who and what are we looking for?

What are you looking for? Motivation! Motivation creates the
circumstances that create the deal.
	As discussed in Chapter 3, you will be looking for motivated
sellers. No matter what kind of real estate investing you do, you
will find a motivated seller is the key to finding the deal.
There are two kinds of motivation to sell. You are looking for
owners who need to sell, not want to sell.
Want to sell – problem properties
Problem properties mean it is the condition of the house that is
motivating the seller to want to sell. It may be an “unwanted house”
the seller inherited. It could be a distressed house that is vacant and
boarded up. This abandoned house may have owners who live
out of state and can’t take care of it. Or it may be an “ugly” house
because of all the disrepair.
These are the types of homes we usually wholesale or rehab,
but sometimes you may still want to do a lease option with such
properties if you find the right deal.
Need to sell – problem owners
Problem owners are sellers who are distressed because of personal
circumstances. It may be the result of a divorce or the loss of a job.
The seller may have a lot of debt and is having trouble making house
payments. Illness or death can create despair and the need to sell.
Rising medical costs may create financial burdens. Any number of
factors can create a need for debt relief, which is the number one
motivation for a seller to do a lease option. These sellers need to
sell. They are the types of sellers we should be targeting for lease
options.

157

Which properties do you target?

• Nice homes in stable

certain

neighborhoods with little or

neighborhoods and become familiar with

no equity – We are talking about

them, you will have a good idea of the

nice

value of the homes located there. But until

families

you are familiar with the prices in your target

those neighborhoods. Usually these

neighborhoods, be prepared by getting the

properties will not have much equity, but

comps for each area.

that works to our advantage. No equity

	Look at the comps and separately add

can be the incentive for a motivated

up all the square footage of all the homes

seller to do a lease option. In such a

that recently sold in the area and then divide

case, we might tell the seller:

Once

you

start

focusing

on

homes
want

in

areas

where

to

live.

Target

that total by the number of houses sold. This

		 “We usually buy cash or owner

will give you the average square footage of

financing, but that won’t work; you owe

homes in the area. Next, add up the selling

too much! One thing that might work is

price of these houses and divide that total

our lease option program. We can

by the number of houses sold. This will give

make payments for you and maintain

you the average selling price of the homes

your house until we sell it. When would

in the area. Then take the average selling

be a good time for me to come take a

price and divide it by the average square

look at it?”

footage figure to get the average price per
square foot for that neighborhood.

• Homes

priced

75%

or

	Do this for each neighborhood you are

higher than the median sales

targeting. This will give you an idea of the

	price in the area – Get information

value of the homes in each area.

about the median sales price for your
area from your local Board of Realtors®.

Now that you have that information, let’s

	For example, if the median sales

look at what types of properties you should

price in the area is $150,000, you

be targeting:

would be looking for homes priced
$112,500 or higher.

158

Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property: Lease Options

• Houses with no problems or needing little
	repair – With a lease option, you do no want a lot of rehab.
• Homes that are well located – You want to attract
buyers. The homes should be in desirable neighborhoods.
• The home should have a favorable layout – Again,
you want to easily put someone into the home.
How to evaluate neighborhoods and areas
Here’s a quick look at how you might evaluate a neighborhood to
determine the best investment strategy for a property.
• Low-Income – Not for lease option (they are great for
wholesale buying!)
– Attractive prices
– Favorable price versus rent ratio – area ratio 80/20
		 (80% renters/20% owners)
– Strategy – Get in and get out
• Moderate-Income – Critical difference is homeownership
– Homeowners
– Tenants work in blue collar sector
– Tighter competition for deals
– Area ratio of ownership is 50/50 or 60/40
– Strategy
– Wholesale
– Buy on terms (owner financing), turn around and sell to
		 buyer and be the bank

159

• Middle-Income – Most are owners

present time for property purchases. As well,

and work in high-level blue collar jobs

there is an overabundance of housing due

– Area ratio 80/20

to the tremendous amount of building that

– Strategy

took place a few years ago, so we have

– Great for purchase option

a perfect match up of motivated, distressed

– Retail – buy, fix, and sell

sellers and motivated tenants with white

– Rentals – Not as good cash flow, but

collar jobs!

		 have appreciation

Consider this match up carefully as

– Get in title

you begin your lease option investing!

– Urban

For the first time in many, many years,

– Quick-turn

you can buy or control very nice houses,

	 – Don’t fight low-income tenants

in GREAT neighborhoods, and purchase

– Suburban

them at tremendous discounts as the market

– Hold

continues to self-correct or remains stalled.

– Control without owning

Canvas and market for lease option tenants

– Structure favorable financing

(often young married couples with college
degrees), and find out where they want to

A New Real Estate Market Emerges:

live. Then, using your multiple streams of

New Construction Lease Options

income knowledge base, begin searching

There is another area for lease options

for pre-foreclosures in this market area. It’s

that has emerged over the past five years

like magic! You find your tenant FIRST, and

and this new opportunity is due to the

then you go find the perfect home. Your

over-building that occurred during the real

tenant is pre-qualified in terms of income,

estate boom that took place between 2003-

so you know that he or she can afford the

2006. It is the lease option market for new,

monthly lease and the option payment!

or fairly new, construction. Given the tight

And, these tenants are much more motivated

lending guidelines currently in place, there

to do whatever it takes to get their personal

are many motivated and highly qualified

situation handled within the three year lease

tenants with good jobs, substantial cash,

option period.

but not strong enough credit to qualify at the